BEREC Report on the impact of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) solutions in the
telecommunications sector on regulation
8 June 2023
Content
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Although most artificial intelligence (AI) systems in the telecommunications sector are still in
a development phase, AI is expected to play an important role in the sector in the mid-term.
This BEREC report seeks to identify these developments in selected use cases, to assess if
those use cases may have an impact on regulation, and to raise further awareness of the
different use cases as well as the benefits and risks of opportunities regarding the application
of AI in the sector.
Since 2017, the European institutions have intensified their attention on AI, fostering its
development while ensuring that EU values and citizens’ rights are preserved. At the moment
of writing this report, a draft Artificial Intelligence Act is being discussed by the European co-
legislators. The objective of this regulation is ensuring that AI systems in the EU are safe and
in line with EU law as well as providing legal certainty to facilitate investment and innovation
in AI. This legal framework will be complemented by the recently proposed draft AI Liability
Directive.
AI relies on the input of multiple enablers, including access to large amounts of reliable data,
adequate capacity to store and process this data, and as the relevant Electronic
Communication Network (ECN) connectivity. In addition, it is expected that technologies such
as edge computing architectures will contribute to fully exploiting the potential of AI, making it
more accessible and enhancing its performance. BEREC notes that difficulties to access one
or more of these enablers may imply unbalances between different players in developing and
adopting AI. BEREC also underlines the relevance of standardisation to help decrease time
to market and development costs as well as enhancing a level playing field, interoperability
and innovation, market surveillance and mitigate potential lock-in effects.
AI may bring significant benefits for the sector. AI technologies promise considerable savings
in terms of costs and can help automate complex and/or repetitive processes with AI
techniques to optimize network operation, improve customer service or detect new business
opportunities as well as to support the expansion and densification of network infrastructure
and devices in communication networks. Furthermore, the appropriate application of AI can
promote energy efficiency of networks, which can contribute to positive environmental impacts
in addition to costs saving associated with lower energy consumption. On the other hand, AI
also entails a number of risks related to the availability of unbiased and reliable data; liability
in case of error due to the complexity of AI ecosystems; ensuring the explainability in the
decision-making; privacy issues and cybersecurity implications.
The proliferation in the use of AI systems may also have an impact on the design of
telecommunications networks such as new hardware requirements and the integration of
different hardware and software components. AI systems based on cloud services may require
low latency and could lead in some cases to decentralisation in terms of data centre
distribution. AI systems deployed together with internet of things (IoT) infrastructure entailing
a large number of devices connected to one system may affect the network load in case of
malfunctioning.
Telecom market players consider that the adoption of AI in the operational procedures will
become a norm approximately in the next six to ten years. Many of these changes in networks
driven or enabled by AI systems are linked to network virtualization. Other developments could
potentially impact on what networks do as well as how networks function1 or allow
automatically orchestrate and manage network resources while assuring the Quality of
Experience demanded by users.
BEREC develops further on six AI use case areas in telecommunications: Network and
Capacity Planning and Upgrades; Channel Modelling, Prediction and Propagation; Dynamic
Spectrum Sharing; Quality of Service Optimization and Traffic Classification; Security
Optimization and Threat Detection and Fraud Detection and Prevention.
Finally, the report describes the possible uses of AI solutions by NRAs. AI systems could be
used by public administrations such as NRAs, to improve processes related to policy-making,
to public service delivery and the internal management of public authorities. Whilst some
NRAs have studied the use of AI in the telecommunications industry, for the time being, few
have explored ways about how AI could be used within the internal processes of the NRA.
Although the potential benefits of AI are paramount, there are also risks associated with the
applications of AI. Good decision-making depends on unbiased and reliable data. How the
algorithms use the data is often not clear, possibly leading to a lack of trust in the automated
decision making. Privacy and security remain important aspects that justify close monitoring
of AI solutions.
Whereas operators have found many ways to apply AI solutions, the NRAs have not, so far,
much experience in making use of AI. Literature and some examples from European
regulators, or regulators from outside Europe show that there are a good number of use cases
for AI. AI solutions could be used for policy making, public services or internal management.
BEREC expects AI to mature more over the years, both with operators as with NRAs.
With the growing importance of AI, NRAs have to acquaint themselves also with the risks
associated with AI, the methods of monitoring and the methods of assessing. A good
knowledge of the workings of AI is required when making the choice of implementing AI
solutions in order to assess the outcome and impact of the use of AI, or the workings of the
algorithm itself.
In addition, BEREC signals that NRAs could play a role in the implementation of the AI Act in
a national level, in particular when AI is being used in the provision of ECN/S by coordinating
with other relevant bodies and providing technical support based on their specialized
1
For instance, networks could be used as sensors for AI applications or for managing responses in case of
disasters
knowledge and experience in the sector. NRAs should also be equipped to address potential
sectoral competition concerns that might arise in the future regarding the application of AI.
1. INTRODUCTION
Developing a clear understanding of both the benefits and risks associated with use cases
relying on AI becomes essential to ensure that AI is developed and used for societal wellbeing.
Following this standpoint, the EU has fostered a coordinated approach for the development of
AI with both the objective of promoting the uptake of AI, seizing the opportunities brought by
this technology, and of addressing the associated risks. To address these challenges and
make the most of the opportunities AI offers, the Commission published a European AI
strategy in April 20182. The strategy places people at the centre of the development of AI.
More recently, the Commission has put forward a draft Artificial Intelligence Act following this
human-centred approach.
While AI is progressively being deployed in all types of economic and societal activities, this
BEREC report is focused on delivering a high-level view of the application of AI solutions for
the provision of electronic communication networks and services (ECN/S), on the one hand,
and of AI solutions used for regulatory purposes, on the other hand.
Although many of the AI solutions related to the provision of ECN/S services are still under
research and development phase, it is expected that in the mid-term AI will control the majority
of functions in telecom networks3. In this context, BEREC seeks to further identify these
developments and assess any potential impact on sector regulation and, the potential
contribution to seizing the opportunities of AI by the sector.
In this report, BEREC provides a general overview of the impact of AI in the sector, potential
AI risks and benefits to consider when adopting AI solutions, and the future developments
foreseen in the mid-term. In addition, BEREC explores more granularly a number of selected
use case areas, some of them still being developed, some already adopted by the providers,
to gain efficiencies in relation to several areas of network deployment and services provision,
and possibly enabling new opportunities for value creation.
While currently the majority of NRAs have not incorporated yet any AI solution to carry out
their regulatory functions, BEREC notes the potential of these tools to gain efficiencies to carry
out public activities, including supporting the fulfilment of regulatory tasks. One example
identified in the report is the FCC project for the use of AI in broadband mapping.
Although BEREC has not specifically analysed AI before, some of its reports touch on relevant
issues for the uptake of AI. Among those BEREC documents to consider are the Input paper
2 https://ec.europa.eu/transparency/documents-register/detail?ref=COM(2018)237&lang=en
3
Managing AI use in telecom infrastructures. Dialogic. 2020.
on Potential Regulatory Implications of Software-Defined Networking and Network Functions
Virtualisation4, the Report on the Data Economy5, the Summary Report on the conclusions of
the BEREC's Workshop on Open RAN6, the Report on Enabling the Internet of Things7 and,
more recently the High-Level Opinion on the European Commission’s proposal for a Data Act8.
For the elaboration of this report, BEREC gathered information by means of three surveys.
One of these was addressed to the NRAs and focused on the adoption of AI solutions for
regulatory purposes and identifying the relevant use cases for the study. The other two were
addressed to the market players and academics. It must be noted, however, that only one
response from academia was received. The full list of respondents is available in ANNEX I.
2. LEGAL FRAMEWORK
In October 2017, the European Council invited “the Commission to put forward a European
approach to artificial intelligence by early 2018”9. The European Council concluded that the
EU needed a sense of urgency to address emerging trends: this includes issues such as AI
and blockchain technologies, while at the same time ensuring a high level of data protection,
digital rights and ethical standards. Following this Council invitation, the Commission
published a European strategy in April 2018, the Communication on the Artificial Intelligence
for Europe10. This strategy places people at the centre of the development of AI and aims at
making the EU a world-class hub for AI. In April 2021, the Commission presented an AI
package including a Communication on fostering a European approach to artificial
intelligence11; an update of the Coordinated Plan on AI (with EU Member States),12 a proposal
for a regulation laying down harmonised rules on AI13 (the draft Artificial Intelligence Act,
hereinafter, AI Act), and the AI Liability Directive.
The AI Act aims at ensuring that AI systems in the EU are human centric, safe and in line with
the EU law as well as providing legal certainty to facilitate investment and innovation in AI.
The AI Act also provides a governance and enforcement framework for the application of
fundamental rights and safety requirements on AI systems. Ultimately, the AI Act has to
4 BoR (16) 97, https://www.berec.europa.eu/en/document-categories/berec/others/input-paper-on-potential-
regulatory-implications-of-software-defined-networking-and-network-functions-virtualisation
5 BoR (19) 106, https://berec.europa.eu/eng/document_register/subject_matter/berec/reports/8599-berec-report-
on-the-data-economy
6 BoR (22) 138 https://www.berec.europa.eu/en/events/berec-events-2022/berec-workshop-on-open-ran
7 BoR (16) 39, https://berec.europa.eu/eng/document_register/subject_matter/berec/reports/5755-berec-report-
on-enabling-the-internet-of-things
8 BoR (22) 118, https://www.berec.europa.eu/en/document-categories/berec/opinions/berec-high-level-opinion-on-
the-ecs-proposal-for-a-data-act
9 http://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-14-2017-INIT/en/pdf
10 ibid. pg. 4
11https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/communication-fostering-european-approach-artificial-intelligence
12
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/75787
13 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52021PC0206
facilitate the development of a single market for lawful, safe and trustworthy AI applications
and prevent market fragmentation.
The AI Act allows the differentiation of AI systems by considering:
a. Unacceptable risk AI systems that are particularly harmful and contravening Union
values (e.g., AI systems that deploy subliminal techniques beyond a person’s
consciousness in order to materially distort a person’s behaviour in a manner that
causes or is likely to cause that person or another person physical or psychological
harm). Those AI systems are prohibited by the AI Act.
b. High risk AI systems that pose significant risks to the health and safety or
fundamental rights of persons. The AI Act imposes a set of requirements on those
systems and have to follow conformity assessment procedures before those systems
can be placed on the Union market.
c. Limited risk AI systems on which only minimum transparency obligations are
imposed (e.g., chatbots).
d. Minimal risk on which no legal obligations are imposed (e.g. spam filters).
The proposed rules are to be enforced at Member State level, and a cooperation mechanism
at Union level with the establishment of a European Artificial Intelligence Board is envisaged.
Finally, measures to support innovation are also proposed, such as AI regulatory sandboxes14.
At the moment of writing this report, the legislators are debating the classification of digital
infrastructures under the different categories of the AI Act. The European Commission (EC)
proposal includes as high-risk AI systems related to the management and operation of critical
infrastructure those intended to be used as safety components in the management and
operation of road traffic and the supply of water, gas, heating and electricity, but not ECN/S.
The respondents to the survey circulated to market players underlined that ECN/S should not
be classified as high risk per se, but solely where it concerns the use of AI applications in
ECN/S for the management of the mentioned critical infrastructures. BEREC notes that
addressing this issue is not part of the scope of this Report.
In addition to the legislation specifically addressing AI, the EU acquis include a number of
relevant pieces of legislation that regulate the conditions of access to data, an essential input
for the development of AI. The main ones are the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR)15, the Directive on privacy and electronic communications16, the Network and
14 Although the AI Act is still under the legislative debate, Member States are already working on sandboxes. The
first regulatory sandbox on Artificial Intelligence was presented by Spain in June 2022. https://digital-
strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/news/first-regulatory-sandbox-artificial-intelligence-presented
15 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679&from=EN
16
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:02002L0058-20091219&from=EN
Information Security (NIS) Directive17, the Regulation on a framework for the free flow of non-
personal data in the European Union18, the Directive on open data and the re-use of public
sector information19, the Data Governance Act20, as well as the proposed Regulation on
harmonised rules on fair access to and use of data (Data Act)21. Recently, a proposal for a
Directive on adapting non-contractual civil liability rules to artificial intelligence (AI Liability
Directive)22 was published.
3. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS
The AI Act defines23 AI systems as software that is developed with one or more of the
techniques and approaches listed in its Annex I, and can, for a given set of human-defined
objectives, generate outputs such as content, predictions, recommendations, or decisions
influencing the environments they interact with.
The AI techniques and approaches in Annex I of the AI Act encompass:
a) systems which employ machine learning (ML) approaches,
b) logic- and knowledge-based approaches, and
c) statistical approaches (including Bayesian estimation).
BEREC notes that, at the moment of drafting this report, this definition is under discussion by
the legislators and, thus, subject to changes in the legislative process. Without pre-empting
the outcome of the legislative process and taking into consideration that currently there is no
AI system definition commonly agreed, BEREC draws on the AI Act definition for the
preparation of this report. The lack of a common definition of AI was also raised by the
stakeholders in their responses to the survey.
The overview provided in Annex I of this Report contains further technical details about these
AI techniques and other technical aspects of the AI systems considered during the preparation
of this Report.
17 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016L1148&from=EN
18 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32018R1807&from=EN
19 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32019L1024&from=EN
20 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52020PC0767&from=EN
21 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52022PC0068&from=EN
22 https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/1_1_197605_prop_dir_ai_en.pdf
23 The EC defines “AI systems” building on the definition issued by the OECD Recommendation of the Council on
Artificial Intelligence. The rationale of the EC for choosing this definition is that it is technology neutral and future-
proof. Additionally, to further increase legal certainty, the definition is complemented with a list of specific
approaches and techniques used for the development of AI systems included in Annex I of the AI Act. To ensure
that this list is future proof, the EC will be able to update the use cases listed in high-risk use case areas by means
of delegated acts.
The latest wave of AI has been possible thanks to ML techniques. ML is based on the use of
very large amount of data to teach machines to solve determinate problems. On the basis of
this data, the software can identify new patterns and create new rules. A concrete type of ML
is deep learning or neuronal networks, which aim to imitate the processing of the human brain.
The input data is processed at different layers. Each layer output is used as an input for the
next layer.
Consequently, AI currently relies on a number of enablers or inputs: access to reliable data
and ultimately large amount of data and capacity to store and process this data (i.e., computing
processing power and data storage) as well as connectivity. It should be noted that beyond
the application of AI systems by telecommunications providers, their services may play an
important role for the use of AI – for instance, through the provision of low-latency connectivity
services or through mobility data. In addition, it is expected that technologies such as edge
computing architectures will contribute to fully exploiting the potential of AI, making it more
accessible and enhancing its performance. Difficulties to access one or more of these enablers
may imply unbalances in the possibilities to develop and adopt AI by different players.
Standards play a key role by facilitating interoperability and switching, and thus mitigate
potential lock-in effects. According to van der Vorst et al. (2020), standardisation helps
decreasing development costs and time to market, facilitating market surveillance, and
enhancing a level playing field, as well as interoperability and innovation while ensuring ex
ante control.24 Along these lines, the lack of harmonised standards for AI to facilitate its use
across Europe was also mentioned as a concern by the survey respondents.
The AI Act anchors compliance of high-risk AI systems with the Regulation in the compliance
with relevant standards. For this reason, standards approved by CEN-CENELEC25 are key to
the implementation of the AI Act. These can include standards related to the data used for
training26, design27 or the classification28 of computational approaches for AI systems.
Furthermore, the AI Act encourages voluntary compliance for all types of AI systems as well
as the development of codes for important issues such as social and environmental
sustainability.
Beyond the AI Act, a relevant standardisation body in particular for the telecommunications
sector is the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) which has published a variety of
standards for AI applications related to telecommunications29, and set up multiple working
24 Van der Vorst et al., 2020: Managing AI use in telecom infrastructures. Advice to the supervisory body on
establishing risk-based AI supervision.
25 https://www.cencenelec.eu/areas-of-work/cen-cenelec-topics/artificial-intelligence/
26 For instance, the ISO/IEC standard ISO/IEC CD 5259-1 (https://www.iso.org/standard/81088.html?browse=tc).
27 For instance, the ISO/IEC standard ISO/IEC DIS 25059 (https://www.iso.org/standard/80655.html?browse=tc).
28 For instance, the ISO/IEC standard ISO/IEC TR 24372:2021
(https://www.iso.org/standard/78508.html?browse=tc ). The definition of AI in the draft AI Act is itself not based on
international technical standards.
29 E.g. the Guidelines for intelligent network analytics and diagnostics ITU-T E.475 (https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-
E.475-202001-I/en), the Recommendation ITU-T Y.3174 on a Framework for data handling to enable machine
groups dedicated to particular topics, such as the Global Initiative on AI and Data Commons30.
In the EU, the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) is also carrying out
extensive work related to AI in the telecommunications sector. On average, the survey
respondents rated concerns about a lack of AI standards 3 on a scale of 1 (not important) to
5 (very important), while a respondent noted that the monitoring of the quality of the AI
product/service on which they depend and which is supplied by a third party, presents a
challenge for them, expressing the wish for third-party certification frameworks (such as ISO).
The AI ecosystem is shaped by a multitude of stakeholders and institutions. An overview of
some of these actors is presented in ANNEX III. However, it is important to note that the
activities of these stakeholders take place on a variety of levels. At the level of the EU, many
of the activities are focused on the proposed AI Act and liability framework, and encompass
stakeholders as diverse as data protection authorities, hardware and software providers, as
well as standardisation bodies. At Member State level, AI strategies often shape the way
businesses, research and Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) engage, and which
topics are prioritised. Beyond the EU, the Council of Europe is working on a treaty with special
regard to the human rights impacts of AI systems.
4. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN TELECOMMUNICATIONS
AI is a transversal technology that can be applied to a variety of use cases. In the
telecommunications sector, processes are highly digitalised and digital data31 are available for
training and operating AI systems, thus facilitating the adoption of AI technologies.
Furthermore, the scale of telecommunications networks and the complexity of managing
networks as well as Customer Management Relationship incentivise the adoption of
automated systems.
Mapping the impact of AI in the telecommunications sector requires detailed engagement with
the involved actors, the datasets with which AI systems are trained, the hardware required to
run AI systems, as well as an understanding of how telecommunications products and services
integrating AI are being used by and affect consumers. With this report, BEREC seeks to
provide an initial overview of the issues and some key applications areas in the
telecommunications sector, which could provide a basis for deeper analysis in other work
streams.
learning in future networks including IMT-2020 (https://www.itu.int/ITU-
T/recommendations/rec.aspx?rec=14134), the Recommendation ITU-T Y.3116 on Traffic typization IMT-2020
management based on an artificial intelligence approach (https://www.itu.int/ITU-
T/recommendations/rec.aspx?id=14855), the Recommendation ITU-T Y.3178 on a Functional framework of
artificial intelligence-base network service provisioning in future networks including IMT-2020
(https://www.itu.int/ITU-T/recommendations/rec.aspx?id=14613) and others.
30
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/extcoop/ai-data-commons/Pages/default.aspx
31 As long as this use is in line with the relevant data protection legislation (e.g. GDPR and E-Privacy Directive).
4.1. Benefits
AI technologies promise considerable savings in terms of costs and can help automate
complex and/or repetitive processes. AI-based solutions are expected to assist
telecommunication market players – network operators, equipment vendors and application
providers – to provide personalized services to users and improve network quality, by
extracting value from the analysis of massive amounts of data and applying improved
prediction and decision-making processes. ECN/S providers collect highly valuable
information both from their customers (e.g. traffic profile, geolocation, service use) and their
networks (e.g. performance indicators, statistics, devices). These data sources could be
efficiently exploited with AI techniques to optimize network operation, improve customer
service or detect new business opportunities.
It is important to note that AI applications promise significant savings: in the case of virtual
network topologies in connection with fixed networks, one application was calculated to save
up to 20% in CapEX and 25% in OpEX (Mata et al., 2018, p. 51)32. The importance of cost
savings was also highlighted by the survey respondents.
The fast pace of technological innovation inherent to network evolution, the exponential growth
of data and connected devices and the continuously challenging service requirements result
in an increasingly complex network infrastructure operation. Network intelligence and
automation are needed to manage the expansion and densification of network infrastructure
and devices in communications networks, especially for next generation networks such as 5G
and 6G, where AI is a driving force behind innovation and the digital transformation of business
models.
According to the survey conducted by BEREC, the top reasons for using AI systems were to
remaining competitive by providing or adopting innovative solutions, to retain flexibility and
agility (e.g. monitoring emerging problems and facilitating intervention), attaining security
guarantees, and operations optimisation. The two least prioritised reasons were customisation
and personalisation, and to consider AI systems as drivers of new business revenues (see
Figure 4 When assessing whether to deploy a new AI solution, which benefits listed below do
you pursue or prioritise? Average rating of survey respondents (n=7) in ANNEX II).
Another complementary source of information highlighting the value of AI for the
telecommunications sector is the report recently published by Ericsson33 based on a survey
of more than 80 communications service providers (CSPs) around the world. In this report, a
majority of providers believe that AI can result in IT and network OpEX reductions, as well as
returns on investment between 5 and 10 percent. Most of them have AI deployment ongoing
or planned, primarily focused on customer and service experience, security, and IT operations,
32 The source does not specify if AI related costs (including cost of implementing and maintaining AI system,
integration with legacy, qualified staff etc. …) were considered.
33 https://www.ericsson.com/en/reports-and-papers/further-insights/ai-business-potential
and highlight the improved customer experience and network operations optimization as the
main benefits of implementing AI.
4.2. Risks
Although AI technology is bringing benefits to the operation and service provision in
telecommunications networks, a number of factors should be taken into consideration when
evaluating the impact of AI systems in this field.
The risk described are based on the answers from the survey conducted by BEREC with
market experts and focuses on those perceived as the most relevant. Nevertheless, BEREC
notes that there are additional risks. Some examples include the potential lock-in of an
operator to a given a supplier when becoming dependant on an AI model. Another example
could be a vendor training its AI model using the data of a specific operator and reuse the
same “trained” model for another operator. This allows gaining efficiencies in terms of time
and (training) costs, however, raises questions around the ownership of the model, and,
potentially, on privacy.
According to BEREC’s survey, the risks and challenges of deploying AI systems related to
undetected data bias, liability in case of error and access to reliable data were the highest
areas of concern for the respondents (see Figure 5 Which of the following risks and challenges
are you currently most wary of? Average rating by survey respondents (n=7, except for “Other
competition risks”, where n=6) in ANNEX II).
4.2.1. Availability of unbiased and reliable data
While not all computational approaches for AI systems require large amounts of data, access
to the right, high-quality datasets is crucial for training and deploying AI systems. Low-quality
data and in particular biased data will lead to low-quality and biased outputs, and may
negatively impact not only the AI user, but also other stakeholders. The risk of biased data
was one of the top concerns of the survey respondents (together with liability in case of error)
in the context of AI deployment and/or development. At the same time, they highlighted the
important role of the data ecosystem: two-thirds of the respondents agree that AI systems will
drive the need for data governance to share data with partners or third parties, and that cloud
providers will have a role in handling data from both the end-users and the CSPs (see Error!
Reference source not found.).
AI systems demand significant resources during their development and their use. Besides the
adequate data for training and testing AI systems, qualified personnel is also needed. The
computing resources required for the deployment of AI systems are also not negligible. Survey
respondents rated concerns around access to data rather highly, while the shortage of
technical expertise was on average not a dominant concern. Asymmetries in access to these
resources may, in turn, lead to a gap between smaller and larger telecommunications
providers. However, competition risks associated with such an unequal access to resources
counted amongst the two risks that received the lowest ratings by survey respondents.
In the telecommunications sector, the digital divide remains an important issue that may be
exacerbated, if the network enhancements driven by AI technology are only applied to urban
deployments. It is possible that less data is available in rural areas compared to urban areas,
which can lead to different outcomes for rural vs urban users. This is reflected in the concerns
expressed by the survey respondents about risks created by the uncertainty about the
reliability of AI systems due to the scenarios considered during their training. The respondents
rated this risk at an average of 3.6 (out of 5, with 5 meaning “high importance of this risk”).
Moreover, the lack of access to data and/or AI systems for local or regional initiatives
deploying networks in rural areas could lead to a disadvantage for these actors in comparison
to well-established telecommunications and digital providers.
4.2.2. Liability in case of error
The deployment of AI based solutions in networks involves various players of the value chain.
Besides network operators and vendor suppliers, AI algorithm/application providers and
external suppliers of data used by AI systems may also contribute, jointly with integrators
specialized in providing customized end-to-end solutions. Given the heterogeneous nature of
the ecosystem and automation of AI systems, there is uncertainty about the accountability and
liability of each actor in the case of unexpected or mistaken outcomes. Although service-level
agreements (SLA) agreements can include provisions in this regard, the accountability of who
is responsible for the decisions taken by AI systems may be unclear. The importance of liability
in case of error was also recognized by the survey respondents, ranking this risk second place.
4.2.3. Lack of trust in decision making
AI systems allow the processing of large amounts of data, automation of processes as well as
the detection of patterns in datasets. Yet the complexity of AI systems, in particular AI systems
using ML approaches, may render the evaluation of the results validation as a major challenge.
Methods and procedures which ensure that the results presented by AI systems need to be
understood and evaluated. In particular, the enhancement of the explainability of the outputs
will be crucial to guarantee that disputes between stakeholders in the telecommunications
sector can be tackled.
AI explainability relates to the means that allow users to understand and trust AI outputs. When
involving decisions or profiling involving individuals, the provisions in art 22 of the GDPR
establish the data subject’s right to obtain human intervention and an explanation of the
decision reached (Rec 71 GDPR). There are several technical frameworks for Explainable AI
and enhance transparency such as What-if Tool (tensor flow), LIME, DeepLIFT, Shapley etc.
Survey respondents rated concerns about the opacity of AI systems with an average of 3.4
(being 5 the highest rate). Several technical measures to ensure explainability and to increase
trust in the decision making have been implemented by the responding stakeholders, such as
logging and reporting systems, levels of explanation tailored to stakeholder groups, detailed
documentation and triggers with thresholds to identify critical deviations.
4.2.4. Privacy
Highly relevant in the context of data-sharing are also privacy aspects. In particular, whether
data used by AI systems is managed with appropriate safeguards to prevent the monitoring of
individual users. Survey respondents mentioned that they are guided by the provisions of the
GDPR and the regulatory framework for telecommunications (European Electronic
Communications Code -EECC- and ePrivacy Directive) and develop processes to ensure that
data access and usage are compliant with the legal requirements, both in the interests of
privacy protection and to ensure business confidentiality. A respondent noted that business
confidentiality is ensured through non-disclosure agreements but added that these were
insufficient to protect their business strategy.
Data privacy, security and AI integration are the main challenges faced by CSPs when
implementing AI solutions mentioned in the Ericsson report. The data privacy concerns found
in the report appear to stem from the reluctance to share data between different parts of the
same organization.
4.2.5. Security
Cybersecurity research remains an important field for AI, in particular for detecting and
preventing cyberattacks. At the same time, appropriate measures need to be taken to ensure
that these AI systems for cybersecurity are robust and reliable. AI systems deployed by
telecommunications providers themselves must also be appropriately secured in order to
prevent malicious attacks with potentially wide-reaching impacts. As many AI algorithms are
not deterministic, AI systems can be abused. They are vulnerable to automated adversarial
attacks often led by other AI systems, where data is manipulated in order to cheat the model
and result in wrong outcomes.34 Another example of security risk would be the unauthorized
access to data stemming from a lack of control when data is pooled across the company.35
Concerns about security threats to AI-based systems and associated data came in fourth
place when comparing the average ratings provided by survey respondents.
Securing AI is one of the areas on which the EU Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) is also
working and a specific threat landscape report that is sector-agnostic was published36. As part
34 Van der Vorst et al., 2020: Managing AI use in telecom infrastructures. Advice to the supervisory body on
establishing risk-based AI supervision.
35
https://www.ericsson.com/en/reports-and-papers/further-insights/ai-business-potential
36 https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/artificial-intelligence-cybersecurity-challenges
of the conclusions, the development of an AI toolbox is promoted, with specific mitigation
measures for the AI threats identified in the landscape based on risk assessments.
4.3. Other challenges
In response to BEREC’s survey, the market experts included other challenges or anticipated
impacts that should be further taken into consideration with the increase in the uptake of AI
solutions (see Figure 6 Do you anticipate any of the following changes to the CSPs’ network
architecture as a result of an increase in the uptake of AI solutions? in ANNEX II). The
proliferation of the use of AI systems may also have an impact on the requirements for and
the design of telecommunications networks. AI systems based on cloud instances may require
low latency to function appropriately and could lead to decentralisation in terms of data centre
distribution. Using AI systems within telecommunications networks may require new
hardware,37 such as processing chips. In particular, in the context of OpenRAN, issues could
arise with the integration of different hardware and software components (the challenge of
integrating AI in legacy systems was also mentioned by one of the survey respondents). AI
systems are often deployed together with IoT infrastructure, such as sensors, and the large
number of devices connected to one system may affect the network load in case of
malfunctioning.
Five out of six survey respondents agreed that AI systems would drive the need for open and
disaggregated architectures, while two-thirds supported the statement that “AI solutions will
drive further the need for Multi-Access Edge Computing and the uptake of new chipsets that
can manage significant data at the edge of the network will increase”. The location of data
processing is also a crucial question: whether at the edge, favoured for mobile, or in the centre,
it also impacts the potential role of third parties in the data ecosystem. Conversely, the
softwarisation and virtualisation of networks were mentioned by survey respondents as strong
use cases for AI in the telecommunications sector.
AI systems can contribute to the efficient management of telecommunications networks and
thus lower their environmental impact. The BEREC Report ‘Sustainability Assessing BEREC's
contribution to limiting the impact of the digital sector on the environment’ highlighted the
potential of AI contributing to the enabling effect of ICT to bring about positive environmental
impact in the section on stakeholder initiatives: an OECD Working Party on Communication
Infrastructures and Services Policy (WPCISP) report38 on future trends states that the use of
AI systems could be considered when assessing the environmental impact of communications
networks. At the same time, the development and deployment of AI systems is itself very
resource intensive if not properly managed. This might impact the telecommunications sector
37 The hardware requirements of AI were also highlighted as a concern by one of the respondents.
38 ‘Broadband Networks of the Future’, https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/broadband-networks-
of-the-future_755e2d0c-en
through increased carbon emissions, even if those systems are not deployed by providers
themselves, like in the case of cloud-based as well as on-device AI applications.39
AI systems are often not deployed by themselves, but integrated into larger systems
comprised of other hardware, software, or linked to other AI systems. For this reason, it is vital
that AI systems are appropriately tested together with the other components of the system
before deployment, and that the interactions between different AI systems can be
appropriately traced. These measures enable swift interventions to solve possible
malfunctions, which could lead to wide-reaching errors or disruptions. To mitigate these risks,
the survey respondents mentioned developing process management systems to analyse and
classify automated systems, including internal auditing, defining the impact, advantages and
challenges during the early phases of development, and minimising the risk of failures by
design, as well as ensuring sufficient human oversight and intervention capacities.
Furthermore, the challenges also include designing the connections between AI systems in a
hierarchical manner and building in alert triggers to notify network and security operations
centres.
Regarding the existing regulatory barriers for the adoption of AI by telecommunications
providers, the majority of the survey respondents were adamant that use cases in the context
of telecommunications should not be considered high-risk in the context of the AI Act, and that
light-touch approaches, like guidelines or voluntary frameworks, are better suited. In particular,
the necessity for regulators to develop a holistic view of the use of AI in telecommunications
as well as the risks of overlapping legal frameworks and competences were stressed. The
survey respondents currently do not see any regulatory impediments to the deployment of AI
in the telecommunications sector, and one respondent is of the view that the EECC provides
the basis for the use of AI in the telecommunications sector.
4.3.1. Future trends
According to the survey respondents, the adoption of AI in the operational procedures of every
CSP will become a norm approximately in the next six to ten years. The scale of the required
changes in the processes and architectures, the need for more mature standards, challenges
related to legacy systems and the difficulties of developing fully-fledged digital twin simulations
of the changes triggered by AI in the networks were mentioned as drawing out this period of
adoption.
As suggested by the results of the desk research and some market players, future trends
related to AI systems in the telecommunications sector may include the changes in networks
driven or enabled by AI systems, in particular those technologies based on cloud networking40,
39 Gibney (2022): How to shrink AI’s ballooning carbon footprint. https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-022-
01983-7
40
Xavier & Kantarci, 2018: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12243-018-0629-4
such as network function virtualisation (NFV)41 and software-defined networking (SDN) with
major impacts on the configuration and architectural design of networks.42 The softwarization
of networks driven by SDN and NFV technologies, allows faster and easier network
deployment, configuration, and update of network functions, providing programmable control
and resource management functionality that are essential for implementing new enhanced
features like network slicing in mobile networks. Network slicing divides the physical network
infrastructure into multiple virtual networks to support diverse business services, enterprise
applications and use cases, and represents a paradigm shift in the way 5G networks and
beyond (6G) will be designed and operated. Incorporating AI-based solutions will potentially
improve the network management automation and performance optimization of large-scale
systems43.
Further research also points towards the development of on-chip network applications, the
joint operation of networks and computing resources, as well as the use of traffic data together
with declarative intents for network orchestration.42 With AI systems, the role of networks could
also shift, for instance in cases where networks (e.g. fibre optics networks) or routers are used
as sensors for AI applications44 or for managing responses in case of disasters.45 This
research shows that AI systems could potentially impact what networks (can) do as well as
how networks function. In the case of intent-based networking, for instance, instead of relying
on engineers to lay out the path along which a network should operate, a high-level goal is
provided and an orchestration system identifies the best process and executes it.
41 Zheng et al., 2021: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12243-020-00772-5
42 Mata et al., 2018: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S157342771730231X
43 Ssengonzi et al., 2022: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2590005622000133
44
Muaaz et al., 2022: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12243-021-00865-9
45 Tei et al., 2021: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12243-021-00847-x
Figure 1 Visualisation of declarative intent-based network orchestration46
The exponential growth of mobile applications and, services as well as the development of
new use cases, such as customized solutions based on 5G, will challenge the management
of fixed and mobile network infrastructures, increasing the complexity of orchestration of
different segments involved in the end-to-end network service delivery. The Zero-touch
Network and Service Management (ZSM) concept -standardized by ETSI- has emerged to
automatically orchestrate and manage network resources while assuring the Quality of
Experience (QoE) demanded by users. The target is to enable largely autonomous networks
driven by high-level policies and rules, that will be capable of self-configuration, self-
monitoring, self-healing and self-optimization without human intervention. AI technology is
being adopted as one of the key enablers to bring intelligent decision making to the ZSM
network management framework, where operations will be data-driven, predictive and
proactive, enabling business agility47.
Besides these aspects pertaining to material infrastructure, other use cases may be
implemented, for instance the targeting of subscribers to increase revenue (e.g. nudging
subscribers to use all of their data allowance to incentivise them to buy top-ups) 48. Another
example would be the use of AI for marketing purposes (e.g. churn analysis for customer
retention in the CRM area) in order to continuously follow and predict the next purchasing
46 https://www.juniper.net/us/en/research-topics/what-is-intent-based-networking.html
47 Gallego-Madrid et al, 2022: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352864821000614
48
Faulkner, 2015: https://www.proquest.com/docview/1898827114
decisions of the target consumers49. While such endeavours may sound far away, the
development of explainability frameworks for such use cases shows that such use cases may
not be as exotic as they seem at first glance.50 Whether and how such practices impact user’s
rights and to what extent additional transparency requirements may be needed is beyond the
main topic of research here but could be explored further in the future. This potential future
work on the impact of AI on the end-user could take into account that customer management
were signalled by several respondents as a key area for AI systems implementation in the
sector.
In the view of the survey respondents, a series of topics will become important in the coming
years, which partially revolve around the legal framework for AI (AI Act implementation, deep
learning explainability), AI standards for deployment and operation at scale, and ethics (the
latter being considered a hot topic for policy makers). From the point of view of
telecommunications network development and management, zero touch operations, robot
process automation, application-driven quality of service (QoS) (with networks and
applications co-deciding how to handle individual packets, flows and services) as well as multi-
topic streaming aggregation were considered to be future issues. Finally, the issue of data for
the development of AI systems (including infrastructure documentation, the use of critical and
non-critical infrastructure, as well as the integrity of infrastructure data) was noted as relevant
for the future.
5. SELECTED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE USE CASE
AREAS
The use cases described in this report were preselected by the NRAs considering the ones
deemed to be the most relevant according to their remit. This chapter is therefore not meant
to be exhaustive, but rather illustrative, in order to provide an overview of the variety of
applications for AI systems in the telecommunications sector within these areas selected by
the responding NRAs. Other AI systems mentioned by survey respondents include the support
of sustainability measures (e.g. by reducing the electricity consumption of electronic
communications networks and services), customer journey applications (e.g. related to
customer relationship management), optical fulfilment and assurance, predictive
maintenance, end-to-end slice management and location-based service provisioning. During
the public consultation stakeholders signalled additional AI use cases for the provision of
ECN/S. Those include improving reliability, allowing the return of lost coverage to subscribers
more efficiently as well as improving the performance and efficiency of networks by performing
various functions such as network optimization, predictive maintenance, traffic management,
self-healing networks and resource allocation.
49 Savica Dimitrieska et al. (2018) http://ep.swu.bg/images/pdfarticles/2018/ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND
MARKETING.pdf
50 Peterson & Daramola, 2020: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-58817-5_35
5.1. Network and Capacity Planning and Upgrades
5.1.1. Description of the use case
Network and capacity planning and upgrades are activities within the telecommunications
sector that require massive resources, both financial as well as material. This is further
complicated by the fact that networks are designed to handle predicted future usage, as they
are built to last for decades. At the same time, the speed of development, especially in the
mobile sector, requires frequent modifications of the networks (roll-out, upgrade or migration),
which means that network planning and network upgrades are continuous activities. While
much of the literature focuses on the usage of AI applications in mobile networks, AI
applications also exist for fixed networks.
Precisely because network planning and upgrading is such a resource-intensive and
continuous activity, AI applications that reduce the cost of deployment (financial or material)
are highly attractive for telecommunications providers. This was also noted by survey
respondents.
For telecommunications providers it is important to forecast the usage of a network and plan
the infrastructure accordingly. Network capacity planning aims to provide such predictions and
optimise the deployment or management of infrastructure to cope with the predicted usage.
This can also mean that networks can be used for a longer time: for instance, in the case of
fibre optics networks, space-division-multiplexing using AI models can increase the capacity
of a single fibre and prolong the lifetime of the existing infrastructure, delaying the need for
deployment of new fibre optics cables.51
5.1.2. Related applications
AI systems to facilitate network and capacity planning and upgrades can be applied to both
fixed and mobile networks. They may, for instance, predict priority sites, identify optimal
locations or routes for deployment, maximise energy efficiency, minimise the required number
of transmitters or base stations, or design new network architectures. For instance, Chu et al.
(2021) developed a deep learning model capable of recognising possible antenna mounting
points in the context of fixed wireless access deployment to aid developing coverage
estimation reports.
As stated by the survey respondents, the applications currently implemented include AI
systems for traffic prediction, network softwarisation and virtualisation, route optimisation and
cable upgrade optimisation or planning 5G networks.52
51
Jatoba-Neto et al., 2018: https://opg.optica.org/jocn/abstract.cfm?uri=jocn-10-12-991
52 The example on planning 5G networks was focused mostly on eMBB and FWA services in the planning stage.
Route optimisation and cable upgrade optimisation include applications, such as data-assisted
decision for copper reconstruction, or automated optimal routing and migrating decision-
making for in-house fibre routes.
Traffic and capacity demand prediction techniques allow simulating several possible scenarios
and adapting the network design and investments to ensure the QoS and network
performance required by the customers. One such application identified through desk
research would be the simulation of the impact of different forms of switching solutions.53 In
the case of network softwarisation and virtualisation, AI systems are considered to be crucial
enablers, helping to bring about the change to dynamic network operations due to their
capacity for real-time processing of large datasets, and for swiftly executing tasks in an
automated manner. Another example is the use of AI in optimization of Content Delivery
Network (CDN). This allows to proactively identifying network traffic patterns and appropriately
respond to communications traffic demand, so that the users can experience an improved
content performance. That is, AI helps in this case to better address the problem of which
edge server will the CDN direct the user request to54
Challenges for the development of AI systems for network planning and upgrade purposes
include the lack of access to sufficient amounts of reliable data and the lack of computational
capacity to train and deploy these models. These challenges can be resolved in a variety of
ways, for instance by drawing on specific techniques, e.g. generative adversarial networks, 55
or by combining data-driven and model-driven approaches. With machine learning
approaches, the issues of data corruption are equally important for both the training and the
deployment phases. The respondents to the survey also noted that the need to access data
from different sources and in different formats remains a challenge.
The survey respondents indicated that they plan to analyse traffic and performance data to
plan network capacities with mitigation and automation hubs, to employ AI systems for
predictive maintenance, to automate data processing for network capacity planning, and to
optimise 4G networks. Regarding predictive maintenance, one survey respondent noted that
predictive models help to anticipate potential issues in the network related to network service
degradation or potential failures related to several aspects (such as obsolescence and
breakdown of equipment, load problems, energy use optimisation, etc.) that can help to
establish an action plan to mitigate the impact on customers.
One detailed use case provided in the context of the survey concerns the use of AI systems
for capacity planning to reduce electricity consumption. Based on historical data, capacity for
mobile sites may be reduced or shut off in times when the load is predicted to be lower at
certain times (nights, weekends) or in certain areas (summer-house areas), while the
connectivity layer remains functional. If traffic increases, the additional capacity layers may be
53 Jatoba-Neto et al., 2018: https://opg.optica.org/jocn/abstract.cfm?uri=jocn-10-12-991
54 https://www.medianova.com/en-blog/how-artificial-intelligence-and-machine-learning-are-changing-cdns/)
55
See Annex I AI techniques (Game Theory).
turned on again. Through such measures, power savings by a factor of about 2.8 are
estimated without any network degradation.56
Another concrete use case provided by a market expert concerns mobile networks congestion
mitigation. In particular, the application of AI to mobility load balancing in the radio network,
with the aim of optimally offloading traffic from congested cells to neighbouring cells with
reduced load.
In the context of capacity planning, some of the identified challenges included dealing with the
trade-offs of different types of implementation and the associated investment costs.51
5.1.3. Conclusions and regulatory implications
Both the desk research as well as the survey responses indicate that there are many potential
areas, where AI systems could be developed and applied to support activities related to
network and capacity planning and upgrades. Stakeholders foresee that AI will play a major
role in this domain in telecoms in the future. On the regulatory side, NRAs consider it highly
relevant for BEREC to closely follow the technological advances that AI may bring to network
planning and monitoring, and to be aware of the possible implications to the strategic
objectives on connectivity and open and sustainable markets. Some of the issues that might
arise are presented here in an illustrative way.
Many governments fund broadband deployment (fixed/mobile). Using AI tools could potentially
help to reduce the cost of deployment in different scenarios, such as the case of selecting the
best location points to install cells (in particular, small cells deployment), or the most adequate
routes for fibre deployment. Whether these AI systems could be shared by operators and
municipalities using an AI commons approach like the one proposed by the ITU57, would merit
for further investigation.
The potential savings, which could be achieved, particularly in the context of network planning
and upgrades, show that operators have an incentive to use AI models in their networks.
Given that stakeholders other than traditional telecommunications providers may be involved
in network roll-out, the question arises whether alternative network providers (e.g.
municipalities in the case of fibre optics networks roll-out) have access to the required data
and robust models to achieve similar savings. Finally, the different levels of data availability
for particular regions and a focus on urban instead of rural areas58 may lead to unequal levels
of maturity or application of AI models.
Transparency about the weights and trade-offs included in AI algorithms at network levels may
prove to be necessary, for instance if MVNOs file complaints about being affected negatively
by algorithms deployed by their host MNOs to manage capacity. In such cases, NRAs and
56 Use case submitted by a telecommunications provider.
57
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/extcoop/ai-data-commons/Pages/default.aspx
58 E.g. Patri et al., 2019: https://opg.optica.org/jocn/abstract.cfm?uri=jocn-11-7-371
telecommunications providers may need to find common approaches for evaluating the impact
of AI systems and ensuring explain ability.
As the example of using AI systems to reduce the electricity consumption of mobile networks
shows, there can be significant benefits from employing AI systems for sustainability
measures. However, some users may experience delays in receiving the full capacity and may
not be aware of such measures. This issue in particular may be exacerbated, if users in rural
areas are affected differently by such measures than users in urban areas. Finally, such AI
systems may not be fully in the control of telecommunications providers, as they may be
embedded in the network hardware.
5.2. Channel Modelling, Prediction and Propagation
5.2.1. Description of the use case
Channel modelling is one of the most important research topics for wireless communications,
since the propagation channel determines the performance of any communication system
operating in it. Specifically, channel modelling is a process of exploring and representing
channel features in real environments, which provides guidelines for the network planning and
optimization. Channel models are based on data collected during measurement campaigns in
representative scenarios. The usage of multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) antennas,
beamforming and millimetre waves in the new generations of wireless communication
networks creates the need for developing new channel models, possibly with the help of AI
algorithms.
The available literature provides descriptions of various models developed in order to predict
the channel usage, some of them being based on neural networks. Jiang and Schotten
(2016)59 consider that the challenge in the channel prediction is the parameters estimation.
This estimation itself is based on the current and past channel impulse responses. In order to
develop the model, they have used recurrent neural networks (RNN), a class of machine
learning that uses both training data and its memory of past states, while the phases are the
same as in any AI technique (training and inference). The results have shown the
effectiveness of the RNN against the outdated channel state information, while having a
moderate computational complexity. The predictor can be applied in frequency-flat and
frequency-selective MIMO fading channels.
59https://www.researchgate.net/publication/335407971_Neural_Network-
Based_Fading_Channel_Prediction_A_Comprehensive_Overview/fulltext/5d649eaf458515d6102666d8/Neur
al-Network-Based-Fading-Channel-Prediction-A-Comprehensive-Overview.pdf
Ding and Hirose (2014)60 proposed prediction methods based on complex-valued neural
networks. These include a combination of time and frequency, and reduced learning costs.
Rappaport et al. (2017)61 mention the importance of channel models for simulating
propagation in “a reproductible and cost-effective way” and for the design and comparison of
radio air interfaces and system deployment. The overview of different models and different
standards has shown that the propagation models are vital for the improvement of the mobile
industry.
5.2.2. Related applications
The results of the survey within BEREC point towards a high interest in the subject, most of
the responses being in the higher range of the scale. The answers for the entire category of
planning and monitoring are justified, in principle taking into account the strategic objective
related to promoting connectivity. Some respondents mentioned that some of the applications
are already related to the regulatory activities, one pointing out specifically channel modelling.
Out of the five answers received from the industry regarding the deployment or the plans to
deploy AI applications for channel modelling, prediction and propagation, three were positive,
therefore indicating an interest in this area. The details provided by the respondents show the
importance of real time network monitoring, which allows the early detection of anomalies,
patterns and trends and therefore improved diagnosis and repair times in the network. It was
also pointed out that channel modelling is mostly provided by vendors of mobile radio network
equipment.
The answers are the more relevant in the context in which improved prediction and decision-
making models and cost reduction are amongst the higher ranked perceived benefits of AI
solutions deployment.
At the same time, the respondent who indicated that the applications are mostly provided by
vendors mentioned as a specific risk/challenge the dependency on the quality of the delivered
product and the quality control, which could be mitigated by a certification by a third party (e.g.
ISO).
5.2.3. Conclusions and regulatory implications
Both the regulators and the stakeholders consider channel modelling an important aspect for
network monitoring. For the NRAs, this is relevant especially in the context of promoting
connectivity as well for their own activities, and for the stakeholders in relation to the benefits
in terms of cost reduction and QoS.
60 https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/6755477/authors#authors
61 https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/7999294
5.3. Dynamic Spectrum Sharing
5.3.1. Description of the use case
Radio spectrum is a fundamental economic resource in the electronic communications sector,
and its importance has increased in recent years due to the massive expansion of the amount
of traffic of wireless services62. Given that, by its nature, spectrum is a scarce resource, it is
crucial to have an adequate management in order to ensure that it is efficiently used, and that
it maximizes all the value that it can deliver. Recital 107 of the EECC states that radio spectrum
is a scarce public resource with an important public and market value. It is an essential input
for radio-based electronic communications networks and services and, insofar as it relates to
such networks and services, should therefore be efficiently allocated and assigned by national
regulatory or other competent authorities in accordance with harmonised objectives and
principles governing their action as well as to objective, transparent and non-discriminatory
criteria, taking into account the democratic, social, linguistic and cultural interests related to
the use of radio spectrum.
The classical spectrum management, based on a fixed spectrum allocation policy, leads to
inefficient usage due to underutilization. For instance, according to different estimates for
several countries, only a fraction of the allocated radio spectrum is actually used, in some
cases with very low occupancy rates63 64.Thus, a dynamic approach to spectrum management
could increase efficiency65.
Under its 5G Action Plan, the EC wants to boost EU efforts for the deployment of 5G
infrastructures and services across Europe. Jointly with the EECC, and among other things, it
wants to ensure the timely assignment and availability of radio spectrum66. The EC has
identified and quantified the spectrum requirements that will be needed to comply with its
62 According to some estimates, global traffic per year will reach 4.8 zettabtyes at the end of 2022, while global
internet users will reach 4.8 billion and 28.5 billion devices will be connected to the network
https://www.globenewswire.com/en/news-release/2018/11/27/1657381/0/en/Cisco-Predicts-More-IP-Traffic-in-
the-Next-Five-Years-Than-in-the-History-of-the-Internet.html
63 The spectrum indoor occupancy rate in Germany for the band 20 MHz-3 GHz is around 32%, whereas occupancy
for frequency bands between 3-6 GHz is very low. See M. Wellens, J. Wu, P. Mahonen, Evaluation of spectrum
occupancy in indoor and outdoor scenario in the context of cognitive radio
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/4549835. Similarly, spectrum occupancy in Barcelona and Poznan is
between 20%-30%.
64 In the US spectrum average occupancy rates over 3 GHz are below 20%. See T. Taher, R. Bacchus, K. Zdunek,
D. Roberson, Long-term spectral occupancy findings in Chicago
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/5936195
65 Recital 124 of the EECC states that network infrastructure sharing, and in some instances radio spectrum
sharing, can allow for a more effective and efficient use of radio spectrum and ensure the rapid deployment of
networks, especially in less densely populated areas. Whereas establishing the conditions to be attached to rights
of use for radio spectrum, competent authorities should also consider authorising forms of sharing or coordination
between undertakings with a view of ensuring effective and efficient use of radio spectrum or compliance with
coverage obligations.
66
5G Action Plan https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/5g-action-plan
objectives under different sharing scenarios. In the no-sharing scenario, around 76 GHz will
be needed to meet users’ needs, whilst in a full-sharing scenario 19 GHz will suffice, which
would imply a drastic reduction in spectrum requirements. 67
5.3.2. Related applications
ML techniques are used to optimise the flow of data between base stations and mobile
networks. A well-functioning network needs different parameters that define the capacity and
efficiency of radio spectrum, such as distance to users and connected users. Those
parameters can be improved by AI.
The Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS)68 allows for more dynamic mapping of
spectrum, partially solving some of the underutilization problems. Under this system, several
certified automatic platforms (Spectrum Access Systems, SAS) are authorized to dynamically
award permissions to devices (CBSD) to use assigned channels based on geo-location
information, real-time information from a sensing network (Environmental Sensing Capability,
ESC) and database of awarded priority licenses.69
According to Ying-Chang Liang (2020)70, the most relevant benefits of applying AI techniques
to dynamic spectrum management are autonomous feature extraction (AFE), because AI
schemes can automatically extract features from data. Further benefits relate to robustness to
the dynamic environment (RDE), which implies that, thanks to the data-driven approach and
continuous learning, spectrum management is not affected by changes in the radio
environment, and decentralized implementation (DI), which means that the central controller
is no longer needed and each device can autonomously obtain its required spectrum resource;
and reduced complexity (RC).
Following Ying-Chang Liang (2020), there are three important recent applications of ML
techniques that could contribute to a better spectrum management and partially solve issues
regarding accuracy, performance, complexity and underutilization.
 Machine learning for spectrum sensing
Spectrum sensing is a primary technology for cognitive radio. Its purpose is to avoid
interference with licensed users and assist them to detect the status of the spectrum and its
67 Identification and quantification of key socio-economic data to support strategic planning for the introduction of
5G in Europe https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/2baf523f-edcc-11e6-ad7c-
01aa75ed71a1/language-en
68 Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) is a 150 MHz wide broadcast band of the 3.5 GHz band (3550 MHz
to 3700 MHz) in the United States. In 2017, the US Federal Communications Commission (FCC) completed a
process which began in 2012 to establish rules for commercial use of this band, while reserving parts of the band
for the US Federal Government to limit interference with US Navy radar systems and aircraft communications
70 Y.C, Liang. Dynamic Spectrum Management: From Cognitive Radio to Blockchain and Artificial Intelligence.
Springer Open (2020) https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-981-15-0776-2.
availability71. With the aim of increasing the accuracy of spectrum sensing, several spectrum
sensing algorithms have been developed: estimator-correlator detector, the semi-blind energy
detector ant the blindly combined energy detection.
Recent evidence suggests that methods based on deep learning techniques perform better
than traditional spectrum sensing methods (i.e., maximum-minimum eigenvalue ratio-based
method and frequency domain entropy-based method)72.
 Machine learning for signal classification
The ability to classify signals is a fundamental task that has many different applications, and
in an age of mass wireless communication, it is more important than ever to identify and
classify electromagnetic signals with fast and accurate tools. In recent years, deep learning
techniques are being applied to detect radiofrequency signals. They can identify the presence
of a signal without requiring full protocol information, and can also be used to detect non-
communication waveforms, like radar-signals73. In order to achieve better performance with
low computational complexity, ML techniques have been introduced in solving classification
problems and have shown superior performances than conventional methods.
 Deep reinforcement learning for dynamic spectrum access
Conventional dynamic spectrum access is based on centralized control node that is
responsible for the spectrum allocation to users. Prior to making decisions, this centralized
node needs to collect information across the network. For instance, information regarding the
users’ position and base stations. This information is complex and disperse. The difficulties of
obtaining this information hinders the appropriate functioning of the network when there is a
sufficient large number of users, which, ultimately, could yield to poor performance.
To solve this problem, reinforcement learning can be used. This technique consists of a
learning process, where an agent can periodically make decisions, observe the results, and
then automatically adjust its strategy to achieve the optimal policy74. However, there are also
limitations, mainly referred to the amount of time that is necessary to reach a solution since it
requires gaining knowledge of an entire system. Fortunately, Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL) can overcome those limitations and improve the learning speed and the performance
of algorithms. Hence, it enables centralized control nodes to solve non-convex and complex
problems, to achieve optimal solutions without complete and accurate network information.
71 Ian F. Akyildiz, Brandon F. Lo, Ravikumar Balakrishnan, Cooperative spectrum sensing in cognitive radio
networks: A survey, Physical Communication, Volume 4, Issue 1, 2011, Pages 40-62, ISSN 1874-4907
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S187449071000039X
72 S. Zheng, S. Chen, P. Qi, Huaji Zhou, X. Yang. Spectrum Sensing Based on Deep Learning Classification for
Cognitive Radios. arXiv. 2019 https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.06020.
73 Elyousseph, Hilal, and Majid L. Altamimi. "Deep learning radio frequency signal classification with hybrid
images." 2021 IEEE International Conference on Signal and Image Processing Applications (ICSIPA). IEEE,
2021. 74
N.C. Luong, D.T. Hoang, S. Gong, D. Niyato, P. Wang, Y.-C. Liang, D.I. Kim, Applications of deep reinforcement
learning in communications and networking: a survey. IEEE Commun. Surv, Tutor. (2019)
5.3.3. Conclusions and regulatory implications
The realization of dynamic spectrum access with cognitive radio largely depends on the
willingness of the regulators to open the spectrum for unlicensed access, but it also involves
a technical component that need multidisciplinary approach from different fields, such as
machine learning, computer networking, information theory or signal processing. In recent
years, there is a trend for a more flexible approach to spectrum regulation. For instance, in
November 2008 the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) presented a document with
proposals for removing unnecessary regulations that restricted the development of spectrum
markets75. In the UK, the Office of Communications (OFCOM) proposed to allow licence
exempt use of interleaved spectrum for cognitive devices76. That being said, there are already
several market practices aimed at increasing efficient use through spectrum sharing
approaches. For instance, the DSS feature is in use for 4G/5G band sharing to provide both
services in the same frequency band based on the actual traffic demand. Other market
practices that try to encourage spectrum sharing are network sharing agreements between
operators, roaming agreements and network slicing.
Reviewed evidence in this section shows that there exists room for improvement in spectrum
management, and AI techniques are a well-suited technology to foster this new dynamic
approach that will be needed to satisfy future demand. These AI-based Dynamic Spectrum
Management mechanisms have shown to achieve better performance and robustness than
conventional schemes. However, there are also some challenges that must be addressed,
both technologically and regulatory. To maximize the value of these algorithms, regulators
should shift from a fixed to dynamic and more flexible approach.
5.4. Quality of Service Optimization and Traffic Classification
5.4.1. Description of the use case
QoS Optimization is instrumental in preventing and solving congestion in the network and
providing end-users with the service level they require from the network. One of the most
important tasks of QoS is to deal with real-time traffic that requires high bandwidth use, such
as videocalls and streaming services. With the adoption of 5G, the demand for real-time
communication, for example for virtual reality (VR)-applications, increases. This makes the
tool of QoS optimisation essential for internet service providers (ISPs), if they want to continue
to provide end-users with the level of service they require.
The responses received from stakeholders notes that AI is applied to achieve a better QoS /
QoE typically in the following applications (not exhaustive list): RAN congestion prediction,
75
Notice of proposed rulemaking. Report ETDocketNo. 00-402, Federal Communications Commission (2000)
76
Digital dividend review: a statement on our approach to awarding the digital dividend. Technical report, Office of
Communications (2007).
network traffic forecasting, network traffic classification and routing, congestion control,
predictive maintenance, fault management and security mitigation solutions.
ISPs can employ various QoS techniques in their network, such as classification, marking,
policing, shaping, congestion avoidance and queuing. These methods rely on a number of
measurements including latency, error rate or jitter. AI can be used to optimize QoS by, for
example, collectively analysing a number of these parameters, such as those concerning the
radio environment, quality of the perceived signal or the number of packets lost.
All QoS techniques are particularly well suited for the adoption of AI and can benefit from the
automation of processes, because they can easily be processed and analysed in all layers of
the network from its control system. The adoption of AI can enhance QoS and avoid over-
provisioning of services, hence allowing a more efficient use of the network resources. The
next section further zooms in on the adoption of AI in traffic classification, policing and queuing,
as these techniques are a key part of the QoS mechanisms.
5.4.2. Related applications
With an increasing number of applications and services being transmitted and OTT operators
sharing the same network, traffic management becomes more sophisticated. Mature
technology currently implemented in networks lacks capacity to accommodate unpredicted
overloads of a specific traffic type. Instead, certain ML techniques can be used to achieve
optimal traffic management by influencing routing or traffic engineering policies, avoiding
traffic loss or oversizing for bulk loads of traffic. Nonetheless, any traffic management
measures have to respect the provisions of the Open Internet Regulation (OIR).
Network slicing is one of the most important techniques to guarantee QoS in 5G networks,
meaning it is an architecture that allows the division of the network in multiplexed virtualized
and independent network sharing the same physical infrastructure. AI may help creating each
slice end-to-end isolated and designed to meet the requirements needed for a specific
application. In Balmer et al. (2020), ISPs indicated that they also see a role for equipment
manufacturers in this area. For example, equipment providers increasingly provide 5G cells,
which use AI to optimise traffic management.77
5.4.3. Conclusions and regulatory implications
NRA’s have identified AI use cases in QoS and traffic classification as an area of special
interest. The OIR and the BEREC Guidelines on the implementation of this regulation (BEREC
OI Guidelines)78 are the most relevant regulatory instruments for QoS and traffic management.
77 Balmer, R.E., Levin, S.L., and Schmidt, S. (2020) “Artificial Intelligence Applications in Telecommunications and
other network industries” Telecommunications Policy 44(6), p. 6.
78 BEREC Guidelines on the Implementation of the Open Internet Regulation, BoR (22) 81,
https://www.berec.europa.eu/en/document-categories/berec/regulatory-best-practices/guidelines/berec-
guidelines-on-the-implementation-of-the-open-internet-regulation-0.
This section shortly outlines the relevant provisions and indicate their relationship with the
employment of AI in these use cases.
The OIR lays down rules for ISPs when they provide internet access services to end-users.
Article 3(3) of the Regulation states that all traffic is to be treated equally, irrespective of the
sender or receiver, the content accessed or distributed, the applications or services used or
provided, or the terminal equipment used. Equal treatment also means no discrimination of
restriction or interference with the traffic. This provision, however, does not prevent ISPs from
implementing reasonable traffic management measures. In order to be considered to be
“reasonable", traffic management would have to be based on objectively different technical
Quality of Service (QoS) requirements of specific categories of traffic. Such measures are not
allowed to monitor specific content (i.e. anything from the transport layer protocol payload).
Additionally, the Regulation contains rules for the provision of services other than internet
access services, which are optimized for specific content, applications or services, also known
as specialised services. Article 3(5) specifies that ISPs may only offer such services, if they
meet the necessity requirement, and if the network capacity is sufficient. These rules apply
regardless of the use of AI in these services.
Jull and Schmidt (2009) found that a principle-based approach is superior to prescriptive rules
“in situations where technology can quickly overtake any such short-term prescriptive rules”.79
Balmer et al. (2020) indicated that for AI in telecommunication services, it will generally be
sufficient to regulate outcomes, such as reliability, or to regulate through principles such as
reasonability, necessity and non-discrimination.80 Considering that the OIR and the BEREC
OI Guidelines follow the principle-based approach contributes to their durability.
QoS optimisation is a challenging topic on a technical level, but these challenges can play out
differently in specific situations. For instance, handover optimisation (e.g., based on user
mobility prediction, as in Bahra & Pierre, 2021) in border regions and/or in roaming situations
may have an effect on end-users due to the different billing systems applied for roaming and
domestic use. Another example where QoS optimisation is crucial for end-users is seamless
handover to enable the use of autonomous vehicles. This may necessitate closer cooperation
between telecommunications providers across borders.
Lastly, it is important to keep in mind that for AI and ML techniques to properly work, very large
datasets are required. ISPs, particularly smaller ones, may want to work more closely together
and share more data to be able to offer more innovative or specialised services to end-users.81
79 K. Jull, S. Schmidt. (2009) “Preventing harm in telecommunications regulation: New matrix of principles and rules
within the ex ante versus ex post debate” Canadian Business Law Journal 47(3), p. 329-362.
80 Balmer, R.E., Levin, S.L., and Schmidt, S. (2020) “Artificial Intelligence Applications in Telecommunications and
other network industries” Telecommunications Policy 44(6), p. 9.
81
Balmer, R.E., Levin, S.L., and Schmidt, S. (2020) “Artificial Intelligence Applications in Telecommunications and
other network industries” Telecommunications Policy 44(6), p. 7.
In short, optimising QoS through the adoption of AI allows for a more efficient use of network
resources. It thereby contributes to the ability of networks to sustain more and more real-time
traffic that requires high bandwidths without congestion. Regardless of the presence and use
of AI, the OIR and the BEREC OI Guidelines ensure the equal treatment of traffic and regulate
the network capacity and necessity for specialised services.
5.5. Security Optimization and Threat Detection
The research on AI related to security purposes especially in the context of
telecommunications is extensive. The broad topic of security optimization can be described
as proactively strengthening a network to better respond to evolving security threats, as well
as to planned and unplanned events. 82 There are various proposals to achieve this goal via
the introduction of AI and especially machine learning.
ML technology has become mainstream in a large number of domains, and cybersecurity
applications of machine learning techniques are plenty, as Hanada et al. (2019) 83 illustrate.
Examples include malware analysis, especially for zero-day malware detection, threat
analysis, anomaly based intrusion detection of prevalent attacks on critical infrastructures, and
many others. Due to the ineffectiveness of signature-based methods in detecting zero day
attacks or even slight variants of known attacks, ML-based detection is being used by
researchers in many cybersecurity products.
The convergence of data science and cyber security in recent years, as outlined by Sarker et
al. (2020)84, gave birth to the concept of cybersecurity data science, which provides more
effective solutions to cyber threats than traditional methods.
Benzaïd et al. (2020)85 describe AI as pivotal in empowering intelligent, adaptive and
autonomous security management in 5G and beyond networks, due to its potential to uncover
hidden patterns from a large set of time-varying multi-dimensional data and deliver faster and
accurate decisions, while AI’s capabilities and vulnerabilities make it a double-edged sword
that may also jeopardize the security of future networks.
An ENISA report86 outlining the contributions of standardisation to the mitigation of technical
risks, and therefore to trust and resilience in the 5G ecosystem, rather advocates security by
82 Cisco Security Optimization Service, https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/global/en_sg/training-
events/security_techbyte/files/sos_ds.pdf, retrieved 04.10.2000
83Handa, A., Sharma, A., & Shukla, S. K. (2019). Machine learning in cybersecurity: A review. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 9(4), e1306.
84 Sarker, I.H., Kayes, A.S.M., Badsha, S. et al. Cybersecurity data science: an overview from machine learning
perspective. J Big Data 7, 41 (2020).
85 Benzaïd, C., & Taleb, T. (2020). AI for beyond 5G networks: a cyber-security defense or offense enabler?. IEEE
Network, 34(6), 140-147
86
Cosquer, F., Zamora, F., Zugenmaier, A. (2022, March) 5G Cybersecurity Standards, ENISA. DOI
10.2824/700472
design and solid basics with proven methods. The mentioning of AI within the report is limited
to the consideration of new technologies with regard to detection tactics.
Nonetheless, many solutions to the variety of security related challenges the
telecommunications sector faces could benefit from using AI. Probably the most common use
cases can be summarized as security breach and threat detection. ML based AI can be trained
to recognize deviating behaviour (anomaly detection), and therefore correctly detect security
attacks. AI can also be implemented to analyse a large number of alerts issued by security
solutions in order to react to security breaches or threats within the network.
According to Zaman et al. (2018)87, an intrusion detection system can be described as a
software that monitors a single or a network of computers for malicious activities (attacks) that
are aimed at stealing or censoring information or corrupting network protocols.
Various approaches to enhance the traditional intrusion detection and prevention systems
(IDPS) have been brought forward. An example of an IDPS can be seen in Figure 2 depiction
of a typical IDPS (source Dilek et al., 2015)Figure 2. This system “can detect possible
intrusions and attempt to prevent them. Intrusion detection and prevention systems provide
four vital security functions: monitoring, detecting, analysing and responding to unauthorized
activities.” 88
87 Zaman, M., & Lung, C. H. (2018, April). Evaluation of machine learning techniques for network intrusion detection.
In NOMS 2018-2018 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium (pp. 1-5). IEEE.
88
S. Dilek, H. Caku and M. Aydin, (2015), “Applications of Artificial Intelligence Techniques to Combating Cyber
Crime: A Review”, International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications, p. 24.
Figure 2 depiction of a typical IDPS (source Dilek et al., 2015)
Unfortunately, it is rather difficult to determine exactly whether and how much of this research
has actually found its way into the market. Many vendors claim to have AI powered solutions
while the limitations inherent to ML introduce new uncertainties, such as limited datasets, black
box algorithms and high cost of human resources and computing power. Due to these
circumstances many experts within the security field are wary of the hype that surrounds AI.
8990
According to the survey’s responses, stakeholders employ a variety of anomaly detection and
pattern recognitions techniques to detect threat and attacks early. Due to the vast amount of
data passing through the networks and the evolving nature of cyberthreats, effective
identification and mitigation of such threats requires automated analysis capability as well as
autonomous decision-making, to ensure rapid and accurate responses to threats. Such AI
89 Top Three Use Cases for AI in Cybersecurity https://www.datacenterknowledge.com/security/top-three-use-
cases-ai-cybersecurity
90
Taddeo, M., McCutcheon, T., & Floridi, L. (2019). Trusting artificial intelligence in cybersecurity is a double-edged
sword. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(12), 557-560.
systems help reducing the number of events that technicians must attend, reducing the
number of false positives alerts and even activating of preventive controls. However,
compared to stakeholders’ answers on more central topics like network planning and
management, the response on security topics were rather sparse.
5.6. Fraud Detection and Prevention
While ECN/S have always been exposed to fraud, the number of attacks and their impact are
particularly increasing in the last years. The Communications Fraud Control Association
(CFCA)91 estimates the total amount of global telecom revenue loss in 2021 due to fraud at
2.22% of revenues ($39.89 Billion), increasing a 28% ($11.6 Billion) compared to 2019. In
addition, it must be considered that fraud does not only impact telecommunication providers,
but often target their users.
According to Europol92, some of the reasons behind this trend are the increased automation
and spread of the ECN/S. A network becomes 10 times more scalable, meaning that attacks
using that infrastructure will have 10 times the effect, damage, and cost. Furthermore,
criminals also benefit from the increased ECS speeds and use it against the carrier itself. The
increased capability of the networks enables more cases of fraud during the time required to
detect and respond to the attack.
Some of the most common frauds in the telecommunication sector include:
 Spoofing: hiding the origination of identity to perform frauds by modifying IP address,
the Calling Line Identification (CLI) or Automatic Number Identification (ANI). One
example of spoofing is the modification of the CLI of calls from third countries to benefit
from regulated EU termination rates.
 Wangiri/ One Ring and Drop: a call back fraud based on massive missing calls. If the
user responds, the call, unknowingly for the user, is charged as a premium rate.
 Subscription Fraud: creation of false identities to access services with no intention to
pay
 PBX93 hacking allows fraudsters to take control of phone lines by exploiting unsecured
phone networks and, ultimately, make fraudulent calls.
 SIM boxes are used to route international calls through the internet using VoIP and
terminate those calls through a local phone. The caller pays the call as an international
91 CFCA Fraud Loss Survey Report 2021 https://cfca.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/CFCA-Fraud-Loss-Survey-
2021-2.pdf
92Cyber-Telecom Crime Report 2019. https://www.europol.europa.eu/publications-events/publications/cyber-
telecom-crime-report-2019#downloads
93
PBX (private branch exchange) is a telephone system within an enterprise that switches calls between users on
local lines, while enabling all users to share a certain number of external phone lines.
call, the local operator receives the revenue of a local call while the fraudsters retain
the difference.
At the same time, applications for fraud detection have evolved and have become more
sophisticated, often making use of ML based AI for a faster detection and prevention of frauds,
such as text message scams and robocalls from reaching the public. One example is Virtual
Assistant verification94.
Fraud detection systems typically rely on a rules-based method for the identification of telecom
fraud. Traffic data95 is analysed against a set of rules to find anomalies that can be potential
fraud cases. Those rules need to be constantly updated and adapted to changing consumer
behaviours. The detection models based on ML AI are able to adapt and create new rules for
fraud detection. For instance, the recent Electronics Communications Committee, Report 338
(June 2022) about CLI spoofing96 explicitly supports "the encouragement of the installation by
operators of traffic pattern analyses tools based on artificial intelligence".
Nevertheless, according to the CFCA Fraud Loss Survey Report 2021, the use of AI based
fraud management systems to detect fraud is still low.
Figure 3 Industry tools used to detect fraud. Source: CFCA Fraud Loss Survey Report 2021
The responses to BEREC’s survey point in the same direction. Most of the market
stakeholders participating in the survey have deployed or are planning to deploy AI
applications within their network operations with the aim of fraud detection and prevention.
Respondents acknowledged the capacity of AI, together with other measures, by means of
anomaly detection algorithms, to spot unusual usages patterns of network and voice services.
This input is further analysed and possibly actioned upon by human specialists. In addition,
94 https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9474299
95 Including both the monitoring of call detail records (CRD) and signal records.
96
https://www.nkom.no/telefoni-og-telefonnummer/telefonsvindel/_/attachment/download/34a76b0e-011b-4bc0-
b060-cc7761c0ffef:7b521945f6d348bd22fd3569e53458c8347fa51d/ECC%20Report%20338.pdf
the respondents point out that vendors specialised in fraud detection and prevention solutions
are currently developing new R&D solutions based on AI.
Most NRAs are competent for the implementation of art. 97(2) EECC (formerly, in the same
terms, art. 28(2) Universal Service Directive). This provision allows for the blocking access to
numbers or services on a case-by-case basis where this is justified by reasons of fraud or
misuse, and to require that in such cases providers of electronic communications services
withhold relevant interconnection or other service revenues. In this context, the detection and
prevention of fraud committed by means of ECS has been subject of several BEREC reports
and activities, including a cooperation coordination procedure to address cross-border fraud.
According to the BEREC report on cross-border issues under Article 28(2) Universal Service
Directive, only a few NRAs have implemented proactive methods to detect this kind of fraud.
Therefore, most NRAs rely on the complaints received by the end users and ECS providers.
BEREC acknowledges in this report that already in 2010 most European operators used
automated systems for detecting fraud.
6. USE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE SOLUTIONS BY
NRAs
6.1. The use of AI in the public sector
While noting that there is thus far little information available on the impact of the use of AI in
the public sector, van Noordt and Misuraca (2022)97 describe how AI systems could be and
are being used to improve processes related to policy-making, public service delivery and
public authorities’ internal management.
97 van Noordt, C. and G. Misuraca, 2022: Artificial intelligence for the public sector: results of landscaping the use
of AI in government across the European Union. Government Information Quarterly 39 (2022) 101714.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2022.101714
Table 1 An overview of AI functions in government (van Noordt & G. Misuraca, 2022, p. 4)
Governance
Potential AI use
function
Policy
1. To detect social issues more quickly
making
2. To improve public policy decisions (and to estimate potential effects on
policy)
3. To monitor the implementation of policy (and to evaluate existing policy)
4. To enhance citizen participation in policy making
Public
1. To improve the information services of the organization
Services
2. To improve public service delivery to business and citizens
3. To develop new innovative public services
Internal
1. To improve the allocation of human resources
management
2. To improve recruitment services of the public organization
3. To improve financial management of the organization
4. To improve the detection of fraud and/or corruption
5. To improve maintenance
6. To improve public procurement processes
7. To improve organizational (cyber)security.
8. Other
According to the authors, policy-making could be improved by the capacity of AI systems to
process large quantities of different types of data, e.g. images, text, audio, video or data
streams from sensors, in an automated fashion. This could allow public authorities, comprising
NRAs, to include not only more types and amount of data into their decision-making processes
but also to involve more stakeholders, in particular citizens, in their policy development and
facilitate an inclusive approach to devising regulatory action. One simple measure suggested
by van Noordt and Misuraca would be reducing the language barrier by using tools to translate
documents in an automated manner.98 Of the 250 cases analysed in detail by the authors,
about 23% were classified as belonging into this category.
For the delivery of public services, the authors suggest that improvements may be possible
by tools, which personalise or automate interactions with public services, such as requests for
information. The automation of repetitive tasks, for instance reporting, could free up the staff
of NRAs to dedicate more time to personalised support and other tasks. In the sample
analysed by the authors, 46% of the cases fell within this category.
98 The European Commission provides a free-of-charge translation tool which appears to be trained primarily on
legal/policy documents for text snippets (https://webgate.ec.europa.eu/etranslation/translateTextSnippet.html) as
well as for documents (https://webgate.ec.europa.eu/etranslation/translateDocument.html).
This aspect ties in with the third area, AI for enhancing internal management. Here, the authors
mention AI tools for prioritisation of resources, such as inspection, for monitoring operations
of the staff, digitalising or anonymising documents, as well as identifying anomalies, or for
procurement, e.g. by supporting the drafting of contracts. NRAs might also use AI systems for
their own cybersecurity purposes. The authors found that about 30% of the cases analysed
were used for internal management purposes.
6.2. Adoption of AI by NRAs
Some NRAs have studied the use of AI by the telecommunications sector, such as ARCEP’s
study on the Networks of the Future99, or TRAI’s consultation paper on the use of AI and Big
Data for QoS, Spectrum Management and Network Security.100 However, the responses to
BEREC’s survey to NRAs show that the adoption of AI by the NRAs is still at its infancy. Very
few of the NRAs, which participated in BEREC’s study, have undertaken or are planning to
conduct studies to explore ways how AI can be adopted within the internal processes of the
NRA. Those who have responded in the affirmative mentioned the following topics:
 Introduction of AI technology in the internal operations of the NRA
 Radio Channel Modelling including new techniques available for spectrum
sharing among services with both equal status and unequal status;
 Detecting illegal/prohibited content online with AI
 Customer Relations Management Platform including a customer complaint
classification using machine learning and text analysis tools;
 Monitor the market to ensure that products for sale online comply with the product
safety rules in the EU (SAFE AI tool) 101. The SAFE search tool employs AI in the
form of image recognition and ML to identify dangerous and non-compliant
products for sale online. SAFE is funded by the EC and is available to all interested
EU/EFTA market surveillance authorities.
BEREC’s desk research of the publicly available studies and initiatives that NRAs and
Governments have undertaken has resulted in the following list of studies and initiatives
undertaken by NRAs and Governments:
 The Government of Canada has awarded a contract to Ecopia AI to provide next
generation mapping data to address the digital divide by identifying better connectivity
99 “Réseaux du future - Note n° 6 - L’intelligence Artificielle dans les réseaux de télécommunications” Jan 2020
source: arcep.fr/uploads/tx_gspublication/reseaux-du-futur-IA-dans-les-reseaux-janv2020.pdf
100 “Consultation Paper on Leveraging Artificial Intelligence and Big Data in the Telecommunication Sector”, Aug.
2022, source: https://www.trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/CP_05082022_0.pdf
101 https://www.sik.dk/en/business/nyheder/new-digital-fine-toothed-comb-denmark-about-make-more-300-
million-european-consumers-safer
gaps in order to accelerate the deployment of broadband infrastructure across the
country102.
 The Australian Communications and Media Authority is looking at developing further
its data analytics processes103 and is also open to proposals to trial Dynamic Spectrum
Access technology104.
 OFCOM looked into the use of AI to measure online experiences105.
 The FCC has set up a Technological Advisory Council Working Group on Artificial
Intelligence and Computing to analyse the impact that AI may have on the nation’s
networks. This Working Group’s proposals include the adoption of AI in broadband
mapping, AI for radio frequency interference detection and to generate further
knowledge from the databases that the FCC manages106.
 According to the French Conseil d’État, competition authorities are considering the use
of AI systems to detect cartels formed through algorithmic collusion.107, 108
For NRAs considering the adoption of AI technologies, BEREC notes that the following factors
may be taken into consideration:109
 Data used for training AI systems should be thoroughly checked for biases and quality
(van Noordt & Misuraca, 2022, p. 3). The Good Practice Principles for Data Ethics in
the Public Sector developed by the OECD could provide a helpful starting point.110 In
102 “Ecopia AI Awarded Contract from Canadian Government to Support Rural Broadband Mapping Across the
Country” Jan 2022, source: https://www.ecopiatech.com/news-post/ecopia-ai-awarded-contract-from-canadian-
government-to-support-rural-broadband-mapping-across-the-country
103 “Artificial intelligence in communications and media” July 2020 source:
https://www.acma.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-
07/Artificial%20intelligence%20in%20media%20and%20communications_Occasional%20paper.pdf
104 “Five-year spectrum outlook 2021–26 work program” ACMA, Sept 2021 source:
https://www.acma.gov.au/sites/default/files/2021-09/FYSO%202021-26.docx
105 “Automated approaches to measuring online experiences: Executive Summary, June 2021, source:
https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0015/220425/automated-tooling-report.pdf
106
“The Importance of Artificial Intelligence and Data for the Telecommunications Industry and the FCC,” Jan 2021
Source: https://www.fcc.gov/sites/default/files/fcc_aiwg_2020_whitepaper_final.pdf
107 https://www.conseil-etat.fr/actualites/s-engager-dans-l-intelligence-artificielle-pour-un-meilleur-service-public
108 However, the likelihood of autonomous algorithmic collusion (without agreement between companies) is still
debated, with the German Federal Cartel Authority (and the French Competition Authority) remaining thus far less
certain about the applicability of experimental results to real market conditions
(https://www.bundeskartellamt.de/SharedDocs/Publikation/DE/Schriftenreihe_Digitales/Schriftenreihe_Digitales
_6.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=3). On the other hand, the UK’s Competition and Market Authority underlines
the current paucity (not lack) of empirical evidence for this phenomenon, thus not disputing that autonomous
algorithmic collusion can be achieved in real market conditions
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/algorithms-how-they-can-reduce-competition-and-harm-
consumers/algorithms-how-they-can-reduce-competition-and-harm-consumers#theories-of-harm); this is the line
of argument followed by the French Conseil d’État.
109 For further details, see the CAHAI’s provisional document on Artificial Intelligence in the Public Sector:
https://rm.coe.int/cahai-pdg-2021-06-2779-3226-6755-v-1/1680a29927
110 https://www.oecd.org/digital/digital-government/good-practice-principles-for-data-ethics-in-the-public-
sector.htm
general, it has been noted that the problems of data availability as well as accessibility
are often underestimated.111
 The results of AI systems should lead to equitable outcomes for different types of
stakeholders that can be explained (van Noordt and Misuraca, 2022, p. 3).
 Introducing an AI system may require qualification training for staff112 as well as
changes of the data flow within NRAs or their processing capacities.
 Impact assessments should be completed prior to deployment, and adequate
accountability structures should be set up.113
From a different perspective, NRAs could support the implementation of the AI Act at a
national level, in particular when AI is used in the provision of ECN/S.
7. CONCLUSIONS
AI is a transversal technology that can be applied to a variety of use cases. In the
telecommunications sector, processes are highly digitalised and digital data are available for
training and operating AI systems, thus facilitating the adoption of AI technologies.
Furthermore, the scale of telecommunications networks and the complexity of managing
networks as well as Customer Management Relationship incentivise the adoption of
automated systems.
Although the potential benefits of AI are paramount, there are also risks associated with the
use of AI, which vary according to the context of deployment. Unbiased and reliable data are
the basis for good decision-making. But how the algorithms use the data is often not clear,
possibly leading to a lack of trust in the automated decision making. Privacy and security also
remain important aspects that justify close monitoring of AI solutions.
With the growing importance of AI, NRAs have to acquaint themselves with the risks
associated with AI, the methods of monitoring and the methods of assessing. A good
knowledge of AI is required to study the outcome of AI, or the workings of the algorithm itself.
Whereas operators have found many ways to apply AI solutions, the NRAs have not made
much use of AI so far. Literature and some examples from some regulators in Europe and
abroad show a good number of use cases for AI. AI solutions could be used for policy making,
public services or internal management. BEREC expects AI to mature over the years, both
with operators and NRAs, and thus for AI to increasingly play a role for BEREC. Therefore,
BEREC will continue supporting NRAs in gaining further understanding of the use and
111 Vial, Gregory, Jinglu Jiang, Tanya Giannelia, and Ann-Frances Cameron (Winter 2021) The Data Problem
Stalling AI. In: MIT Sloan Management Review. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
112 For this purpose, NRAs could consider Elements of AI as a starting point, which is a popular introductory online
course developed by the University of Helsinki and MinnaLearn: https://www.elementsofai.com/
113 https://algorithmwatch.org/en/accountability-in-the-use-of-ai-for-public-administrations/
implications of AI in the sector. A possible area of BEREC’s future work in this field could be
to assess whether and how AI impacts the user rights and the features of AI systems for
customer management.
BEREC signals that NRAs could play a role in the implementation of the AI Act in a national
level, in particular when AI is used in the provision of ECN/S by coordinating with other relevant
bodies and providing technical support in based on their specialized knowledge and
experience in the sector. NRAs should also be equipped to address sectoral competition
concerns that might arise in the future regarding the application of AI.
ANNEX I. Techniques for AI systems
The techniques used in the literature reviewed can be grouped into a series of sub-fields. This
Annex briefly explains these techniques and references areas in which these methods have
been applied in telecommunications114. Other techniques may include expert systems and
other approaches, which are however not addressed by research included in this report.
It is important to note that many AI systems apply a combination of techniques from different
fields. For instance, an AI system to ensure the quality of service and dynamic bandwidth
allocation in Passive Optical Networks (PONs) may draw on both genetic algorithms (which
are considered part of the search methods and optimisation theory group) as well as neural
networks (a learning method).
Cognitive systems, while also applied in telecommunications (e.g. for fault detection, topology
mapping or network virtualisation), are different from AI approaches in that they draw on some
of these techniques, but incorporate other approaches as well.115
Search methods and optimisation theory
This group of techniques includes mathematical formulations (e.g. mixed integer linear
programming), breadth-first search and tabu search, as well as a group of techniques related
to local search algorithms and metaheuristics. This sub-group includes teaching-learning
based optimisation, simulated annealing and genetic algorithms, as well as a further subgroup
of methods related to swarm intelligence (which in turn includes techniques such as ant colony
optimisation, artificial bee colony algorithms, gravitational search algorithms, fire-fly algorithms
and particle swarm optimisation).
These techniques are applied, amongst others, for survivable optical networks, regenerator
placement, connection establishment, resource allocation, splitter placement in PONs,
placement of Optical Network Units (ONUs), transmitters, QoS guarantees and dynamic
bandwidth allocation in PONs, network reconfiguration and reduction/estimation of burst loss.
Statistical models
The group of techniques based on statistical models includes Bayesian methods, Kalman
filters and hidden Markov models.
Applications for statistical models include transmitters, receivers, non-linearity mitigation,
statistical solutions for prediction, QoS guarantees and dynamic bandwidth allocation in
114
Drawing on Mata et al. (2018) Survey of AI methods in optical networking.
115 https://www.iks.fraunhofer.de/en/topics/cognitive-systems.html
PONs, reduction/estimation of burst loss, failure/fault detection, linear impairment
identification and connection establishment.
Decision-making algorithms
Techniques grouped as decision-making algorithms include Markov decision processes.
These are a type of reinforcement learning algorithm seeking to optimise its performance by
automatically determining their ideal behaviour.
Resource allocation, connection establishment, and intra-data centers number amongst the
possible applications of these techniques in telecommunications.
Learning methods
By far the most well-known branch of AI techniques, learning methods include the sub-group
of probabilistic learning methods (which include Bayesian learning and expectation
maximisation) and machine learning. Through machine learning, a mathematical model can
be built on the basis of a data set. This model predicts/infers previously unknown variables on
the basis of the original data set and can be applied to new data sets, e.g. for classifying or
categorising data.
Machine learning can be further subdivided into reinforcement learning (which includes Q-
learning), supervised learning and unsupervised learning. The group of techniques classified
as supervised learning includes neural networks (which in turn also encompass deep neural
networks), support vector machines, linear regression, logistic regression, random forests and
instance-based learning (such as K-nearest neighbours or case-based reasoning).
Unsupervised learning techniques include principal component analysis and K-means
clustering.
Applications for machine learning approaches in the context of telecommunications include
resource allocation, modulation format recognition, receivers/non-linearity mitigation,
connection establishment, linear impairments identification, reduction/estimation of burst loss,
network reconfiguration, software-defined networking, QoS guarantees and dynamic
bandwidth allocation, intra-data centers, optical amplification control, OSNR monitoring,
intelligent ROADM, QoT estimation, as well as transmitters.
Game theory
Game theory emerged from applied mathematics as a framework for understanding how
individuals make decisions or act to maximise their returns in situations with predefined rules.
This theoretical branch can be applied in AI development in a variety of ways. For instance,
drawing on game theory, two neural networks can be combined into a generative adversarial
network, where one neural network creates an output which is then judged by the second
neural network as true or false. The aim of the consecutive interaction between these two
neural networks is to maximise the quality of the output of the generating neural network. AI
applications in telecommunications based on game theory include solutions for connection
establishment and statistical solutions for prediction.
ANNEX II. Overview of survey responses
Scale of 1 (not important) to 5 (very important)
1 2 3 4 5
Remain Competitive by providing or adopting… 4.6
Flexibility and agility, e.g. monitoring emerging… 4.3
Attain Security Guarantees 4.1
Operations optimisation 4.1
Reduction of Costs (OpEx and/or CapEx) 4.0
Improved prediction and decision making models 4.0
Shorten the implementation cycle of new technology… 3.9
Augment Customer Experience 3.9
Improved network deployment and faster response to… 3.9
Sustainability support - Reduce the… 3.7
Alignment with Standardisation by eliminating human… 3.7
Derive value from mining of massive data 3.4
Driver for new business revenues 3.3
Customisation and personalisation 3.0
Figure 4 When assessing whether to deploy a new AI solution, which benefits listed below do you
pursue or prioritise? Average rating of survey respondents (n=7)
Average rating from 1 (not important) to 5 (very important)
1 2 3 4 5
Undetected data bias that could entail misleading results 4.1
Liability in case of error (data/AI application,
3.9
supplier/operator/integrator)
Availability/access to suitable and reliable data (to train
3.7
AI applications)
Security threats to AI-based systems and associated data 3.6
Uncertainty about the reliability due to the scenarios
3.6
considered during AI training (e.g. modelling of urban…
Uncertainty about the reliability of the decisions and
3.4
actions executed by AI algorithms, due to their opacity
Lack of AI standards / certification 3.3
Shortage of technical expertise in AI 3.1
Competition risks due to asymmetric access to AI
3.1
technology and data
Other competition risks, e.g. collusion or end-user
2.7
deception (please list)
Figure 5 Which of the following risks and challenges are you currently most wary of? Average rating
by survey respondents (n=7, except for “Other competition risks”, where n=6)
AI solutions will drive the need for data governance in the
stakeholders ecosystem, to share data with partners or 5 1
3rd parties.
AI solutions will drive the need for open and
6 1
disaggregated architecture.
Cloud Providers and other partners will be handling
various data both from the end-users but also from the 5 0
CSPs.
AI solutions will drive further the need for Mobile Edge
Computing and the uptake of new chipsets that can
5 2
manage significant data at the edge of the network will
increase.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Number of responses
TOTAL AGREE TOTAL DISAGREE
Figure 6 Do you anticipate any of the following changes to the CSPs’ network architecture as a result
of an increase in the uptake of AI solutions?
ANNEX III. Key public bodies and stakeholders in the
context of AI
PUBLIC BODIES &
STANDARIZATION TASKS AND ACTIVITIES RELATED TO AI
ORGANIZATIONS
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
The ITU has published a variety of standards for AI applications
International
related to telecommunications116 and set up multiple working
Telecommunications
groups dedicated to particular topics, such as the Global Initiative
Union (ITU)
on AI and Data Commons117.
The Council of Europe has set up a Committee on Artificial
Council of Europe Intelligence118, focusing on the human rights impacts of AI
technologies
EU
The EC is tasked with approving standards developed by CEN-
CENELEC for the implementation of the AI Act, as well as fulfilling
a role in the European AI Board to be set up under that Act.
EC
Furthermore, Art. 39 EECC grants the EC the power to publish
non-compulsory standards or to request CEN, CENELEC or ETSI
to develop such standards.
A CEN-CENELEC Joint Technical
European Committee Committee on Artificial Intelligence has
EUROPEAN for Standardization been established. Standards approved
STANDARDS (CEN) & by CEN-CENELEC119 are key to the
ORGANIZATIONS implementation of the AI Act. These
European Committee
for Electrotechnical can include standards related to the
data used for training AI systems120, for
116 E.g. the Guidelines for intelligent network analytics and diagnostics ITU-T E.475 (https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-
E.475-202001-I/en), the Recommendation ITU-T Y.3174 on a Framework for data handling to enable machine
learning in future networks including IMT-2020 (https://www.itu.int/ITU-
T/recommendations/rec.aspx?rec=14134), the Recommendation ITU-T Y.3116 on Traffic typization IMT-2020
management based on an artificial intelligence approach (https://www.itu.int/ITU-
T/recommendations/rec.aspx?id=14855), the Recommendation ITU-T Y.3178 on a Functional framework of
artificial intelligence-base network service provisioning in future networks including IMT-2020
(https://www.itu.int/ITU-T/recommendations/rec.aspx?id=14613) and others.
117
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/extcoop/ai-data-commons/Pages/default.aspx
118 https://www.coe.int/en/web/artificial-intelligence/cai
119 https://www.cencenelec.eu/areas-of-work/cen-cenelec-topics/artificial-intelligence/
120
For instance, the ISO/IEC standard ISO/IEC CD 5259-1 (https://www.iso.org/standard/81088.html?browse=tc).
Standardization the design of AI systems121 or for the
(CENELEC) classification of computational
approaches for AI systems122.
In June 2020, ETSI published a
whitepaper: Artificial Intelligence and
future directions for ETSI123. ETSI work
related to AI is underway in the
following areas: 5G Systems; Network
European
Optimization and End-to-End Service
Telecommunications
Assurance; IoT, Data Acquisition &
Standards Institute
Management, Governance and
(ETSI)
Provenance; Security and Privacy;
Testing and Health and Societal
Applications of AI (e.g. use of AI for
geo-localization in case of
emergencies).
National
Most MS have developed AI strategies setting out their priorities124. Regulatory and
data protection authorities also play a strong role in the development of Europe’s
approach to the regulation of AI.
Market
STAKEHOLDERS ROLES RELATED TO AI
Telecommunications providers show varying degrees of activity
related to AI; some are actively engaged in research, and many
ECN/S providers
have developed their own AI strategies. Some of these activities
are also organised at European level, e.g. by the GSMA125
Providers of AI systems or the hardware required for the use of
AI and hardware
these systems form an important part of the ecosystem and are
providers
often closely involved in standardisation efforts.
121 For instance, the ISO/IEC standard ISO/IEC DIS 25059 (https://www.iso.org/standard/80655.html?browse=tc).
122 For instance, the ISO/IEC standard ISO/IEC TR 24372:2021
(https://www.iso.org/standard/78508.html?browse=tc ). The definition of AI in the draft AI Act is itself not based on
international technical standards.
123 Artificial Intelligence and future directions for ETSI.
https://www.etsi.org/images/files/ETSIWhitePapers/etsi_wp34_Artificial_Intellignce_and_future_directions_for_
ETSI.pdf
124 https://oecd.ai/en/dashboards/countries/EuropeanUnion
125
https://www.gsma.com/artificialintelligence/
NGOs such as AlgorithmWatch126 or the Green Software
NGO/civil society Foundation127 are specialized in monitoring the use of AI systems
and its potential impact on society.
126 https://algorithmwatch.org/en/projects/
127 The Green Software Foundation developed a tool for monitoring the carbon intensity of software
(https://github.com/Green-Software-
Foundation/software_carbon_intensity/blob/dev/Software_Carbon_Intensity/Software_Carbon_Intensity_Specifi
cation.md ) which was applied by Dodge et al. (2022) to AI based in the cloud: https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.05229
ANNEX IV. Acronyms
AI – Artificial Intelligence ISP – Internet Service Provider
ANI - Automatic Number Identification ISO - International Organization for
Standardization
CBRS - Citizens Broadband Radio Service
ITU - International Telecommunications
CEN-CENELEC European Committee for Union
Standardization (CEN) &
European Committee for Electrotechnical MIMO- Multiple-Input Multiple-Output
Standardization (CENELEC)
ML - Machine Learning
CDN - Content Delivery Network
NFV – Network Function Virtualization
CLI - Calling Line Identification
OSNR - Optical signal-to-noise ratio
CFCA - Communications Fraud Control
OTT – Over The Top
Association
PBX - private branch exchange
CSP – Communications Service Provider
PONs - Passive Optical Networks
EC – European Commission
QoS – Quality of Service
ECN/S - Electronic Communication
Networks and Services QoT - Quality of Transmission
EECC - European Electronic RAN - Open Radio Access Network
Communications Code
ROADM - Reconfigurable Optical Add-
ETSI - European Telecommunications Drop Multiplexer
Standards Institute
RNN - Recurrent Neural Networks
EU – European Union
SLA – Service Level Agreement
GDPR - General Data Protection
Regulation SDN – Software Defined Networking
IDPS - intrusion detection and prevention ZSM - Zero-touch network and Service
systems IoT - Internet of things Management
ANNEX V. PARTICIPANTS IN THE STUDY
TRANSATEL
Telefonica, S.A.
Liberty Global
Telia Company
ECTA (European Competitive Telecom Association)
KPN
Telefónica Germany
Turkcell
Amazon Web Services
Dialogic innovation & interaction
8 June 2023
