ETSI TS 104 223 V1.1.1 (2025-04)
TECHNICAL SPECIFICATION
Securing Artificial Intelligence (SAI);
Baseline Cyber Security Requirements for
AI Models and Systems
Reference
DTS/SAI-0014
Keywords
artificial intelligence, security
650 Route des Lucioles
F-06921 Sophia Antipolis Cedex - FRANCE
Tel.: +33 4 92 94 42 00 Fax: +33 4 93 65 47 16
Siret N° 348 623 562 00017 - APE 7112B
Association à but non lucratif enregistrée à la
Sous-Préfecture de Grasse (06) N° w061004871
Important notice
The present document can be downloaded from the
ETSI Search & Browse Standards application.
The present document may be made available in electronic versions and/or in print. The content of any electronic and/or
print versions of the present document shall not be modified without the prior written authorization of ETSI. In case of any
existing or perceived difference in contents between such versions and/or in print, the prevailing version of an ETSI
deliverable is the one made publicly available in PDF format on ETSI deliver repository.
Users should be aware that the present document may be revised or have its status changed,
this information is available in the Milestones listing.
If you find errors in the present document, please send your comments to
the relevant service listed under Committee Support Staff.
If you find a security vulnerability in the present document, please report it through our
Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure (CVD) program.
Notice of disclaimer & limitation of liability
The information provided in the present deliverable is directed solely to professionals who have the appropriate degree of
experience to understand and interpret its content in accordance with generally accepted engineering or
other professional standard and applicable regulations.
No recommendation as to products and services or vendors is made or should be implied.
No representation or warranty is made that this deliverable is technically accurate or sufficient or conforms to any law
and/or governmental rule and/or regulation and further, no representation or warranty is made of merchantability or fitness
for any particular purpose or against infringement of intellectual property rights.
In no event shall ETSI be held liable for loss of profits or any other incidental or consequential damages.
Any software contained in this deliverable is provided "AS IS" with no warranties, express or implied, including but not
limited to, the warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose and non-infringement of intellectual property
rights and ETSI shall not be held liable in any event for any damages whatsoever (including, without limitation, damages
for loss of profits, business interruption, loss of information, or any other pecuniary loss) arising out of or related to the use
of or inability to use the software.
Copyright Notification
No part may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and
microfilm except as authorized by written permission of ETSI.
The content of the PDF version shall not be modified without the written authorization of ETSI.
The copyright and the foregoing restriction extend to reproduction in all media.
© ETSI 2025.
All rights reserved.
Contents
Intellectual Property Rights
Essential patents
IPRs essential or potentially essential to normative deliverables may have been declared to ETSI. The declarations
pertaining to these essential IPRs, if any, are publicly available for ETSI members and non-members, and can be
found in ETSI SR 000 314: "Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs); Essential, or potentially Essential, IPRs notified to
ETSI in respect of ETSI standards", which is available from the ETSI Secretariat. Latest updates are available on the
ETSI IPR online database.
Pursuant to the ETSI Directives including the ETSI IPR Policy, no investigation regarding the essentiality of IPRs,
including IPR searches, has been carried out by ETSI. No guarantee can be given as to the existence of other IPRs not
referenced in ETSI SR 000 314 (or the updates on the ETSI Web server) which are, or may be, or may become,
essential to the present document.
Trademarks
The present document may include trademarks and/or tradenames which are asserted and/or registered by their owners.
ETSI claims no ownership of these except for any which are indicated as being the property of ETSI, and conveys no
right to use or reproduce any trademark and/or tradename. Mention of those trademarks in the present document does
not constitute an endorsement by ETSI of products, services or organizations associated with those trademarks.
DECT™, PLUGTESTS™, UMTS™ and the ETSI logo are trademarks of ETSI registered for the benefit of its
Members. 3GPP™, LTE™ and 5G™ logo are trademarks of ETSI registered for the benefit of its Members and of the
3GPP Organizational Partners. oneM2M™ logo is a trademark of ETSI registered for the benefit of its Members and of
the oneM2M Partners. GSM® and the GSM logo are trademarks registered and owned by the GSM Association.
Foreword
This Technical Specification (TS) has been produced by ETSI Technical Committee Securing Artificial Intelligence
(SAI).
Modal verbs terminology
In the present document "shall", "shall not", "should", "should not", "may", "need not", "will", "will not", "can" and
"cannot" are to be interpreted as described in clause 3.2 of the ETSI Drafting Rules (Verbal forms for the expression of
provisions).
"must" and "must not" are NOT allowed in ETSI deliverables except when used in direct citation.
Introduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is transforming our daily lives. As the technology continues to evolve and be embedded in
people's lives, it is crucial that efforts are taken to protect AI systems from growing cyber security threats. Special focus
on the cybersecurity of Artificial Intelligence (AI) is important due to its distinct differences compared to traditional
software. These characteristics include security risks such as data poisoning, model obfuscation, indirect prompt
injection and operational differences associated with data management.
The present document utilizes existing good practice in the AI and cyber security landscape alongside novel measures
to provide a set of targeted high-level principles and provisions at each stage of the AI lifecycle. The objective of the
present document is to provide stakeholders in the AI supply chain with clear baseline security requirements to help
protect AI systems.
Information on the AI lifecycle and implementation examples are given in ETSI TR 104 128 [i.1].
1 Scope
The present document defines baseline security requirements for AI models and systems. This includes systems that
incorporate deep neural networks, such as generative AI. For consistency, the term "AI systems" throughout the present
document when framing the scope of provisions and "AI security" which is considered a subset of cyber security. The
present document is not designed for academics who are creating and testing AI systems only for research purposes
(AI systems which are not going to be deployed).
The present document separates principles and requirements into five phases. These are secure design, secure
development, secure deployment, secure maintenance and secure end of life. Relevant standards and publications are
signposted at the start of each principle to highlight links between the various documents and the present document.
This is not an exhaustive list.
NOTE: The principles can also be mapped to the life cycle stages described in ISO/IEC 22989 [i.3]. The secure
design and development principles can be applied during the Design and development life cycle stage.
Similarly, the secure deployment principles can be applied during the Deployment stage, secure
maintenance to the Operations and monitoring stage and secure end of life during the Retirement stage.
2 References
2.1 Normative references
References are either specific (identified by date of publication and/or edition number or version number) or
non-specific. For specific references, only the cited version applies. For non-specific references, the latest version of the
referenced document (including any amendments) applies.
Referenced documents which are not found to be publicly available in the expected location might be found in the
ETSI docbox.
NOTE: While any hyperlinks included in this clause were valid at the time of publication, ETSI cannot guarantee
their long term validity.
The following referenced documents are necessary for the application of the present document.
[1] ISO/IEC 27001:2022: "Information security, cybersecurity and privacy protection — Information
security management systems — Requirements".
[2] CISA: "Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)".
[3] NIST: "AI Risk Management Framework: Second Draft", 2022.
[4] NIST AI 100-1: "AI Risk Management Framework 1.0", 2023.
[5] Australian Signals Directorate: "An introduction to Artificial Intelligence", 2023.
[6] World Economic Forum, IBM: "Presidio AI Framework: Towards Safe Generative AI Models",
2024. [7] OWASP: "OWASP AI Exchange".
[8] MITRE ATLAS™: "Mitigations".
[9] Google®: "Secure AI Approach Framework: A quick guide to implementing the Secure AI
Framework (SAIF)", 2023.
[10] ELSA: "ELSA - European Lighthouse on Secure and Safe AI", 2023.
[11] Cisco: "The Cisco Responsible AI Framework", 2024.
[12] Amazon: "AWS Cloud Adoption Framework for Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, and
Generative AI", Amazon White Paper, 2024.
[13] NIST AI 100-2 E2023: "Adversarial Machine Learning Taxonomy: A Taxonomy and
Terminology of Attacks and Mitigations".
[14] ENISA: "Multilayer Framework for Good Cybersecurity Practices for AI", 2023.
[15] NCSC: "Guidelines for secure AI system development", 2023.
[16] Federal Office in Information Security: "AI Security Concerns in a Nutshell", 2023.
[17] G7 Hiroshima Summit: "Hiroshima Process International Code of Conduct for Organizations
Developing Advanced AI Systems", 2023.
[18] United States Department of Health and Human Services: "Trustworthy AI (TAI) Playbook:
Executive Summary", 2021.
[19] OpenAI: "Preparedness Framework (Beta)", 2023.
[20] Information Commissioner's Office (ICO): "Guidance on the AI Auditing Framework", 2020.
[21] Nvidia: "NeMo-Guardrails", 2023.
2.2 Informative references
References are either specific (identified by date of publication and/or edition number or version number) or
non-specific. For specific references, only the cited version applies. For non-specific references, the latest version of the
referenced document (including any amendments) applies.
NOTE: While any hyperlinks included in this clause were valid at the time of publication, ETSI cannot guarantee
their long term validity.
The following referenced documents are not necessary for the application of the present document but they assist the
user with regard to a particular subject area.
[i.1] ETSI TR 104 128: "Securing Artificial Intelligence (SAI); Guide to Cyber Security for AI Models
and Systems".
[i.2] Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024 laying
down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence and amending Regulations (EC) No 300/2008,
(EU) No 167/2013, (EU) No 168/2013, (EU) 2018/858, (EU) 2018/1139 and (EU) 2019/2144 and
Directives 2014/90/EU, (EU) 2016/797 and (EU) 2020/1828 (Artificial Intelligence Act).
[i.3] ISO/IEC 22989:2022: "Information technology — Artificial intelligence — Artificial intelligence
concepts and terminology".
3 Definition of terms, symbols and abbreviations
3.1 Terms
For the purposes of the present document, the following terms apply:
adversarial attack: attempt to manipulate an AI model by introducing specially crafted inputs to cause the model to
produce errors or unintended outcomes
AI system: engineered system that generates outputs such as content, forecasts, recommendations or decisions for a
given set of human-defined objectives
Application Programming Interface (API): set of tools and protocols that allow different software systems to
communicate and interact
data poisoning: type of adversarial attack where malicious data is introduced into training datasets to compromise the
AI system's performance or behaviour
guardrails: predefined constraints or rules implemented to control and limit an AI system's outputs and behaviours,
ensuring safety, reliability, and alignment with ethical or operational guidelines
inference: reasoning by which conclusions are derived from known premises
NOTE 1: In AI, a premise is either a fact, a rule, a model, a feature or raw data.
NOTE 2: The term "inference" refers both to the process and its result.
input data: data for which an AI system calculates a predicted output or inference
machine learning algorithm: algorithm to determine parameters of a machine learning model from data according to
given criteria
machine learning model: mathematical construct that generates an inference or prediction based on input data or
information
model inversion: privacy attack where an adversary infers sensitive information about the training data by analysing
the AI model's outputs
model training: process to determine or to improve the parameters of a machine learning model, based on a machine
learning algorithm, by using training data
prediction: primary output of an AI system when provided with input data or information
NOTE 1: Predictions can be followed by additional outputs, such as recommendations, decisions and actions.
NOTE 2: Prediction does not necessarily refer to predicting something in the future.
NOTE 3: Predictions can refer to various kinds of data analysis or production applied to new data or historical data
(including translating text, creating synthetic images or diagnosing a previous power failure).
prompt: input provided to an AI model, often in the form of text, that directs or guides its response.
NOTE: Prompts can include questions, instructions, or context for the desired output.
risk assessment: process of identifying, analysing and mitigating potential threats to the security or functionality of an
AI system
sanitisation: process of cleaning and validating data or inputs to remove errors, inconsistencies and malicious content,
ensuring data integrity and security
system prompt: predefined input or set of instructions provided to guide the behaviour of an AI model, often used to
define its tone, rules, or operational context
threat modelling: process to identify and address potential security threats to a system during its design and
development phases
training: process of teaching an AI model to recognize patterns, make decisions, or generate outputs by exposing it to
labelled data and adjusting its parameters to minimize errors
training data: data used to train a machine learning model
3.2 Symbols
Void.
3.3 Abbreviations
For the purposes of the present document, the following abbreviations apply:
AI Artificial Intelligence
API Application Programming Interface
4 Audience
This clause defines the stakeholder groups that form the AI supply chain. An indication is given for each principle on
which stakeholders are primarily responsible for its implementation. Importantly, a single entity can hold multiple
stakeholder roles in the present document as well as responsibilities from different regulatory regimes.
NOTE: Examples include under data protection law, when processing personal data organizations can have a role
of controller and/or joint controller and/or processor, depending on their role in creating and setting up
AI systems.
All stakeholders included in Table 4-1 should note that they can have data protection obligations. Additionally, senior
leaders in an organization also have responsibilities to help protect their staff and infrastructure. Some provisions for
Developers in the present document are less applicable to AI systems involving open-source models. Further
information and guidance about different types of AI systems can be found in ETSI TR 104 128 [i.1].
Table 4-1: Stakeholder definition
Stakeholder Definitions
Developers This encompasses any type of business or organization
across any sector as well as individuals that are
responsible for creating or adapting an AI model and/or
system. This applies to all AI technologies, including
proprietary and open-source models. For context, a
business or organization that creates an AI model and
who is also responsible for embedding/deploying that
model/system in their organization are defined in the
present document to be both a Developer and a System
Operator.
Developers can be AI providers under the EU AI
Act [i.2], when putting a system into service or placing it
on the market.
System Operators This includes any type of business or organization
across any sector that has responsibility for
embedding/deploying an AI model and system within
their infrastructure and/or its ongoing maintenance. This
applies to all AI technologies, including proprietary and
open-source models. This term also includes those
businesses that provide a contractual service to
organizations to embed/deploy an AI model and system
for business purposes.
System operators can be deployers under the EU AI
Act [i.2] and can also be AI providers if they make
changes to the system.
Data Custodians This includes any type of business, organization or
individual that controls data permissions and the integrity
of data that is used for any AI model or system to
function. This stakeholder group also includes those
entities that set the policies for how data is used and
managed for an AI model and/or system. In the context
of an AI system, there could be multiple data custodians
involved because some data used to create a model
could come from the organization that is
deploying/embedding the system in their infrastructure
and other data could be from public databases and other
sources.
End-users This encompasses any employee within an organization
or business and consumers who use an AI model and
system for any purpose, including to support their work
and day-to-day activities. This applies to all AI
technologies and both proprietary and open-source
models. This stakeholder group has been created
because the voluntary Code has placed expectations on
Developers, System Operators and Data custodians to
help inform and protect end-users.
Stakeholder Definitions
Affected entities Encompasses all individuals and technologies, such as
apps and autonomous systems, that are not directly
affected by AI systems or decisions based on the output
of AI systems. These individuals do not necessarily
interact with the deployed system or application.
5 AI Security Principles and Provisions
5.1 Secure Design
5.1.1 Principle 1: Raise awareness of AI security threats and risks
Primarily applies to: System Operators, Developers, and Data Custodians
References: [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11].
Provision 5.1.1-1 Organizations' cyber security training programme shall include AI security content which shall be
regularly reviewed and updated, such as if new substantial AI-related security threats emerge.
Provision 5.1.1-1.1 AI security training shall be tailored to the specific roles and responsibilities of staff members.
Provision 5.1.1-2 As part of an Organization's wider staff training programme, they shall require all staff to maintain
awareness of the latest security threats and vulnerabilities that are AI-related. Where available, this awareness shall
include proposed mitigations.
Provision 5.1.1-2.1 These updates should be communicated through multiple channels, such as security bulletins,
newsletters, or internal knowledge-sharing platforms. This will ensure broad dissemination and understanding among
the staff.
Provision 5.1.1-2.2 Organizations shall provide developers with training in secure coding and system design techniques
specific to AI development, with a focus on preventing and mitigating security vulnerabilities in AI algorithms, models,
and associated software.
5.1.2 Principle 2: Design the AI system for security as well as functionality
and performance
Primarily applies to: System Operators and Developers
References: [7], [8], [6], [14], [15], [16], [11], [17], [18], [19], [5], [20].
Provision 5.1.2-1 As part of deciding whether to create an AI system, a System Operator and/or Developer shall
conduct a thorough assessment that includes determining and documenting the business requirements and/or problem
they are seeking to address, along with associated AI security risks and mitigation strategies.
Provision 5.1.2-1.1 Where the Data Custodian is part of a Developer's organization, they shall be included in internal
discussions when determining the requirements and data needs of an AI system.
Provision 5.1.2-2 Developers and System Operators shall ensure that AI systems are designed and implemented to
withstand adversarial AI attacks, unexpected inputs and AI system failure.
Provision 5.1.2-3 To support the process of preparing data, security auditing and incident response for an AI system,
Developers shall document and create an audit trail in relation to the AI system. This shall include the operation, and
lifecycle management of models, datasets and prompts incorporated into the system.
Provision 5.1.2-4 If a Developer or System Operator uses an external component, they shall conduct an AI security risk
assessment and due diligence process in line with their existing software development processes, that assesses AI
specific risks.
Provision 5.1.2-5 Data Custodians shall ensure that the intended usage of the system is appropriate to the sensitivity of
the data it was trained on as well as the controls intended to ensure the security of the data.
Provision 5.1.2-5.1 Organizations should ensure that employees are encouraged to proactively report and identify any
potential security risks in AI systems and ensure appropriate safeguards are in place.
Provision 5.1.2-6 Where the AI system will be interacting with other systems or data sources, (be they internal or
external), Developers and System Operators shall ensure that the permissions granted to the AI system on other systems
are only provided as required for functionality and are risk assessed.
Provision 5.1.2-7 If a Developer or System Operator chooses to work with an external provider, they shall undertake a
due diligence assessment and should ensure that the provider is adhering to the present document.
5.1.3 Principle 3: Evaluate the threats and manage the risks to the AI
system
Primarily applies to: Developers and System Operators
References: [1], [7], [6], [21], [14], [9], [17], [15], [8], [13]
Provision 5.1.3-1 Developers and System Operators shall analyse threats and manage security risks to their systems.
Threat modelling should include regular reviews and updates and address AI-specific attacks, such as data poisoning,
model inversion, and membership inference.
Provision 5.1.3-1.1 The threat modelling and risk management process shall be conducted to address any security risks
that arise when a new setting or configuration option is implemented or updated at any stage of the AI lifecycle.
Provision 5.1.3-1.2 Developers shall manage the security risks associated with AI models that provide superfluous
functionalities, where increased functionality leads to increased risk. For example, where a multi-modal model is being
used but only single modality is used for system function.
Provision 5.1.3-1.3 System Operators shall apply controls to risks identified through the analysis based on a range of
considerations, including the cost of implementation in line with their corporate risk tolerance.
Provision 5.1.3-2 Where AI security threats are identified that cannot be resolved by Developers, this shall be
communicated to System Operators so they can threat model their systems. System Operators shall communicate this
information to End-users, so they are made aware of these threats. This communication should include detailed
descriptions of the risks, potential impacts, and recommended actions to address or monitor these threats.
Provision 5.1.3-3 Where an external entity has responsibility for AI security risks identified within an organizations
infrastructure, System Operators should attain assurance that these parties are able to address such risks.
Provision 5.1.3-4 Developers and System Operators should continuously monitor and review their system infrastructure
according to risk appetite. It is important to recognize that a higher level of risk will remain in AI systems despite the
application of controls to mitigate against them.
5.1.4 Principle 4: Enable human responsibility for AI systems
Primarily applies to: Developers and System Operators
References: [7], [8], [16]
Provision 5.1.4-1 When designing an AI system, Developers and/or System Operators should incorporate and maintain
capabilities to enable human oversight.
Provision 5.1.4-2 Developers should design systems to make it easy for humans to assess outputs that they are
responsible for in said system (such as by ensuring that models outputs are explainable or interpretable).
Provision 5.1.4-3 Where human oversight is a risk control, Developers and/or System Operators shall design, develop,
verify and maintain technical measures to reduce the risk through such oversight.
Provision 5.1.4-4 Developers should verify that the security controls specified by the Data Custodian have been built
into the system.
Provision 5.1.4-5 Developers and System Operators should make End-users aware of prohibited use cases of the AI
system.
5.2 Secure Development
5.2.1 Principle 5: Identify, track and protect the assets
Primarily applies to: Developers, System Operators and Data Custodians
References: [7], [21], [15], [16], [11], [12], [17], [20]
Provision 5.2.1-1 Developers, Data Custodians and System Operators shall maintain a comprehensive inventory of
their assets (including their interdependencies/connectivity).
Provision 5.2.1-2 As part of broader software security practices, Developers, Data Custodians and System Operators
shall have processes and tools to track, authenticate, manage version control and secure their assets due to the increased
complexities of AI specific assets.
Provision 5.2.1-3 System Operators shall develop and tailor their disaster recovery plans to account for specific attacks
aimed at AI systems.
Provision 5.2.1-3.1 System Operators should ensure that a known good state can be restored.
Provision 5.2.1-4 Developers, System Operators, Data Custodians and End-users shall protect sensitive data, such as
training or test data, against unauthorized access (see clause 5.2.3 for details on securing data).
Provision 5.2.1-4.1 Developers, Data Custodians and System Operators shall apply checks and sanitisation to data and
inputs when designing the model based on their access to said data and inputs and where those data and inputs are
stored. This shall be repeated when model revisions are made in response to user feedback or continuous learning. See
clause 5.2.2 for relevant provisions for open source.
Provision 5.2.1-4.2 Where training data or model weights could be confidential, Developers shall put proportionate
protections in place.
5.2.2 Principle 6: Secure the infrastructure
Primarily applies to: Developers and System Operators
References: [7], [8], [6], [15], [20]
Provision 5.2.2-1 Developers and System Operators shall evaluate their organization's access control frameworks and
identify appropriate measures to secure APIs, models, data, and training and processing pipelines.
Provision 5.2.2-2 If a Developer offers an API to external customers or collaborators, they shall apply controls that
mitigate attacks on the AI system via the API. For example, placing limits on model access rate to limit an attacker's
ability to reverse engineer or overwhelm defences to rapidly poison a model.
Provision 5.2.2-3 Developers shall also create dedicated environments for development and model tuning activities.
The dedicated environments shall be backed by technical controls to ensure separation and principle of least privilege.
In the context of AI, this is particularly necessary because training data shall only be present in the training and
development environments where this training data is not based on publicly available data.
Provision 5.2.2-4 Developers and System Operators shall implement and publish a clear and accessible vulnerability
disclosure policy.
Provision 5.2.2-5 Developers and System Operators shall create, test and maintain an AI system incident management
plan and an AI system recovery plan.
Provision 5.2.2-6 Developers and System Operators should ensure that, where they are using cloud service operators to
help to deliver the capability, their contractual agreements support compliance with the above requirements.
5.2.3 Principle 7: Secure the supply chain
Primarily applies to: Developers, System Operators and Data Custodians
References: [2], [7], [15], [5]
Provision 5.2.3-1 Developers and System Operators shall follow secure software supply chain processes for their
AI model and system development.
Provision 5.2.3-2 System Operators that choose to use or adapt any models, or components, which are not
well-documented or secured shall be able to justify their decision to use such models or components through
documentation (for example if there was no other supplier for said component).
Provision 5.2.3-2.1 In this case, Developers and System Operators shall have mitigating controls and undertake a risk
assessment linked to such models or components.
Provision 5.2.3-2.2 System Operators shall share this documentation with End-users in an accessible way.
Provision 5.2.3-3 Developers and System Operators shall re-run evaluations on released models that they intend on
using.
Provision 5.2.3-4 System Operators shall communicate their intention to update models to End-users in an accessible
way prior to models being updated.
5.2.4 Principle 8: Document data, models and prompts
Primarily applies to: Developers
References: [7], [6], [15], [11], [20]
Provision 5.2.4-1 Developers shall document and maintain a clear audit trail of their system design and
post-deployment maintenance plans. Developers should make the documentation available to the downstream System
Operators and Data Custodians.
Provision 5.2.4-1.1 Developers should ensure that the document includes security-relevant information, such as the
sources of training data (including fine-tuning data and human or other operational feedback), intended scope and
limitations, guardrails, retention time, suggested review frequency and potential failure modes.
Provision 5.2.4-1.2 Developers shall release cryptographic hashes for model components that are made available to
other stakeholders to allow them to verify the authenticity of the components.
Provision 5.2.4-2 Where training data has been sourced from publicly available sources, there is a risk that this data
might have been poisoned. As discovery of poisoned data is likely to occur after training (if at all), Developers shall
document how they obtained the public training data, where it came from and how that data is used in the model.
Provision 5.2.4-2.1 The documentation of training data should include at a minimum the source of the data, such as the
URL of the scraped page, and the date/time the data was obtained. This will allow Developers to identify whether a
reported data poisoning attack was in their data sets.
Provision 5.2.4-3 Developers should ensure that they have an audit log of changes to system prompts or other model
configuration (including prompts) that affect the underlying working of the systems. Developers can make this available
to any System Operators and End-Users that have access to the model.
5.2.5 Principle 9: Conduct appropriate testing and evaluation
Primarily applies to: Developers and System Operators
References: [7], [6], [21], [15], [14], [9], [17]
Provision 5.2.5-1 Developers shall ensure that all models, applications and systems that are released to System
Operators and/or End-users have been tested as part of a security assessment process.
Provision 5.2.5-2 System Operators shall conduct testing prior to the system being deployed with support from
Developers.
Provision 5.2.5-2.1 For security testing, System Operators and Developers should use independent security testers with
technical skills relevant to their AI systems.
Provision 5.2.5-3 Developers should ensure that the findings from the testing and evaluation are shared with System
Operators, to inform their own testing and evaluation.
Provision 5.2.5-4 Developers should evaluate model outputs to ensure they do not allow System Operators or
End-users to reverse engineer non-public aspects of the model or the training data.
Provision 5.2.5-4.1 Additionally, Developers should evaluate model outputs to ensure they do not provide System
Operators or End-users with unintended influence over the system.
5.3 Secure Deployment
5.3.1 Principle 10: Communication and processes associated with
End-users and Affected Entities
NOTE: As part of an organization's wider deployment practices, pre-deployment testing of AI systems is to be
considered alongside the requirements below.
Provision 5.3.1-1 System Operators shall convey to End-users in an accessible way where and how their data will be
used, accessed and stored (for example, if it is used for model retraining, or reviewed by employees or partners). If the
Developer is an external entity, they shall provide this information to System Operators.
Provision 5.3.1-2 System Operators shall provide End-users with accessible guidance to support their use,
management, integration, and configuration of AI systems. If the Developer is an external entity, they shall provide all
necessary information to help System Operators.
Provision 5.3.1-2.1 System Operators shall include guidance on the appropriate use of the model or system, which
includes highlighting limitations and potential failure modes.
Provision 5.3.1-2.2 System Operators shall proactively inform End-users of any security relevant updates and provide
clear explanations in an accessible way.
Provision 5.3.1-3 Developers and System Operators should support End-users and Affected Entities during and
following a cyber security incident to contain and mitigate the impacts of an incident. The process for undertaking this
should be documented and agreed in contracts with End-users.
5.4 Secure Maintenance
5.4.1 Principle 11: Maintain regular security updates, patches and
mitigations
Primarily applies to: Developers and System Operators
References: [20]
Provision 5.4.1-1 Developers shall provide security updates and patches, where possible, and notify System Operators
of the security updates. System Operators shall deliver these updates and patches to End-users.
Provision 5.4.1-1.1 Developers shall have mechanisms and contingency plans to mitigate security risks, particularly in
instances where updates cannot be provided for AI systems.
Provision 5.4.1-2 Developers should treat major AI system updates as though a new version of a model has been
developed and therefore undertake a new security testing and evaluation process to help protect users.
Provision 5.4.1-3 Developers should support System Operators to evaluate and respond to model changes, (for example
by providing preview access via beta-testing and versioned APIs).
5.4.2 Principle 12: Monitor the system's behaviour
Primarily applies to: Developers and System Operators
References: [7], [6], [21], [14], [16], [11], [12], [17], [20]
Provision 5.4.2-1 System Operators shall log system and user actions to support security compliance, incident
investigations, and vulnerability remediation.
Provision 5.4.2-2 System Operators should analyse their logs to ensure that AI models continue to produce desired
outputs and to detect anomalies, security breaches, or unexpected behaviour over time (such as due to data drift or data
poisoning).
Provision 5.4.2-3 System Operators and Developers should monitor internal states of their AI systems where this could
better enable them to address security threats, or to enable future security analytics.
Provision 5.4.2-4 System Operators and Developers should monitor the performance of their models and system over
time so that they can detect sudden or gradual changes in behaviour that could affect security.
5.5 Secure End of Life
5.5.1 Principle 13: Ensure proper data and model disposal
Primarily applies to: Developers and System Operators
Provision 5.5.1-1 If a Developer or System Operator decides to transfer or share ownership of training data and/or a
model to another entity they shall involve Data Custodians and securely dispose of these assets. This will protect AI
against security issues that can transfer from one AI system instantiation to another.
Provision 5.5.1-2 If a Developer or System Operators decides to decommission a model and/or system, they shall
involve Data Custodians and securely delete applicable data and configuration details.
History
Document history
V1.1.1 April 2025 Publication
