I n t e r n a t i o n a l T e l e c o m m u n i c a t i o n U n i o n
ITU-T Y.3173
TELECOMMUNICATION (02/2020)
STANDARDIZATION SECTOR
OF ITU
SERIES Y: GLOBAL INFORMATION
INFRASTRUCTURE, INTERNET PROTOCOL ASPECTS,
NEXT-GENERATION NETWORKS, INTERNET OF
THINGS AND SMART CITIES
Future networks
Framework for evaluating intelligence levels of
future networks including IMT-2020
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3173
ITU-T Y-SERIES RECOMMENDATIONS
GLOBAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE, INTERNET PROTOCOL ASPECTS, NEXT-GENERATION
NETWORKS, INTERNET OF THINGS AND SMART CITIES
GLOBAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE
General Y.100–Y.199
Services, applications and middleware Y.200–Y.299
Network aspects Y.300–Y.399
Interfaces and protocols Y.400–Y.499
Numbering, addressing and naming Y.500–Y.599
Operation, administration and maintenance Y.600–Y.699
Security Y.700–Y.799
Performances Y.800–Y.899
INTERNET PROTOCOL ASPECTS
General Y.1000–Y.1099
Services and applications Y.1100–Y.1199
Architecture, access, network capabilities and resource management Y.1200–Y.1299
Transport Y.1300–Y.1399
Interworking Y.1400–Y.1499
Quality of service and network performance Y.1500–Y.1599
Signalling Y.1600–Y.1699
Operation, administration and maintenance Y.1700–Y.1799
Charging Y.1800–Y.1899
IPTV over NGN Y.1900–Y.1999
NEXT GENERATION NETWORKS
Frameworks and functional architecture models Y.2000–Y.2099
Quality of Service and performance Y.2100–Y.2199
Service aspects: Service capabilities and service architecture Y.2200–Y.2249
Service aspects: Interoperability of services and networks in NGN Y.2250–Y.2299
Enhancements to NGN Y.2300–Y.2399
Network management Y.2400–Y.2499
Network control architectures and protocols Y.2500–Y.2599
Packet-based Networks Y.2600–Y.2699
Security Y.2700–Y.2799
Generalized mobility Y.2800–Y.2899
Carrier grade open environment Y.2900–Y.2999
FUTURE NETWORKS Y.3000–Y.3499
CLOUD COMPUTING Y.3500–Y.3999
INTERNET OF THINGS AND SMART CITIES AND COMMUNITIES
General Y.4000–Y.4049
Definitions and terminologies Y.4050–Y.4099
Requirements and use cases Y.4100–Y.4249
Infrastructure, connectivity and networks Y.4250–Y.4399
Frameworks, architectures and protocols Y.4400–Y.4549
Services, applications, computation and data processing Y.4550–Y.4699
Management, control and performance Y.4700–Y.4799
Identification and security Y.4800–Y.4899
Evaluation and assessment Y.4900–Y.4999
For further details, please refer to the list of ITU-T Recommendations.
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3173
Framework for evaluating intelligence levels of future
networks including IMT-2020
Summary
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3173 specifies a framework for evaluating the intelligence of future
networks including IMT-2020 and a method for evaluating the intelligence levels of future networks
including IMT-2020 is introduced. An architectural view for evaluating network intelligence levels
is also described according to the architectural framework specified in Recommendation
ITU-T Y.3172.
In addition, the relationship between the framework described in this Recommendation and
corresponding work in other standards or industry bodies, as well as the application of the method
for evaluating network intelligence levels on several representative use cases are also provided.
History
Edition Recommendation Approval Study Group Unique ID*
1.0 ITU-T Y.3173 2020-02-06 13 11.1002/1000/14133
Keywords
Architecture, evaluation, IMT-2020 networks, intelligence level, network intelligence.
* To access the Recommendation, type the URL http://handle.itu.int/ in the address field of your web
browser, followed by the Recommendation's unique ID. For example, http://handle.itu.int/11.1002/1000/11
830-en.
Rec. ITU-T Y.3173 (02/2020) i
FOREWORD
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is the United Nations specialized agency in the field of
telecommunications, information and communication technologies (ICTs). The ITU Telecommunication
Standardization Sector (ITU-T) is a permanent organ of ITU. ITU-T is responsible for studying technical,
operating and tariff questions and issuing Recommendations on them with a view to standardizing
telecommunications on a worldwide basis.
The World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (WTSA), which meets every four years,
establishes the topics for study by the ITU-T study groups which, in turn, produce Recommendations on
these topics.
The approval of ITU-T Recommendations is covered by the procedure laid down in WTSA Resolution 1.
In some areas of information technology which fall within ITU-T's purview, the necessary standards are
prepared on a collaborative basis with ISO and IEC.
NOTE
In this Recommendation, the expression "Administration" is used for conciseness to indicate both a
telecommunication administration and a recognized operating agency.
Compliance with this Recommendation is voluntary. However, the Recommendation may contain certain
mandatory provisions (to ensure, e.g., interoperability or applicability) and compliance with the
Recommendation is achieved when all of these mandatory provisions are met. The words "shall" or some
other obligatory language such as "must" and the negative equivalents are used to express requirements. The
use of such words does not suggest that compliance with the Recommendation is required of any party.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
ITU draws attention to the possibility that the practice or implementation of this Recommendation may
involve the use of a claimed Intellectual Property Right. ITU takes no position concerning the evidence,
validity or applicability of claimed Intellectual Property Rights, whether asserted by ITU members or others
outside of the Recommendation development process.
As of the date of approval of this Recommendation, ITU had not received notice of intellectual property,
protected by patents, which may be required to implement this Recommendation. However, implementers
are cautioned that this may not represent the latest information and are therefore strongly urged to consult the
TSB patent database at http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/ipr/.
© ITU 2020
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, by any means whatsoever, without the
prior written permission of ITU.
ii Rec. ITU-T Y.3173 (02/2020)
Table of Contents
Page
6.1 Challenges in operation, administration and maintenance of IMT-2020
Appendix II – Application of the method for evaluating network intelligence level on
Rec. ITU-T Y.3173 (02/2020) iii
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3173
Framework for evaluating intelligence levels of future
networks including IMT-2020
1 Scope
This Recommendation describes a framework for evaluating the intelligence levels of future
networks including IMT-2020. This includes:
– Development trend of network intelligence;
– Methods for evaluating network intelligence levels;
– Architectural view for evaluating network intelligence levels.
The appendices describe the relationship between the framework described in this Recommendation
and corresponding work in other standards or industry bodies, as well as the application of the
method for evaluating network intelligence levels on representative use cases.
2 References
The following ITU-T Recommendations and other references contain provisions which, through
reference in this text, constitute provisions of this Recommendation. At the time of publication, the
editions indicated were valid. All Recommendations and other references are subject to revision;
users of this Recommendation are therefore encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the
most recent edition of the Recommendations and other references listed below. A list of the
currently valid ITU-T Recommendations is regularly published. The reference to a document within
this Recommendation does not give it, as a stand-alone document, the status of a Recommendation.
[ITU-T Y.3172] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3172 (2019), Architectural framework for machine
learning in future networks including IMT-2020.
3 Definitions
3.1 Terms defined elsewhere
This Recommendation uses the following terms defined elsewhere:
3.1.1 machine learning pipeline [ITU-T Y.3172]: A set of logical nodes, each with specific
functionalities, that can be combined to form a machine learning application in a telecommunication
network.
NOTE – The nodes of a machine learning pipeline are entities that are managed in a standard manner and
can be hosted in a variety of network functions [b-ITU-T Y.3100].
3.1.2 machine learning function orchestrator (MLFO) [ITU-T Y.3172]: A logical node with
functionalities that manage and orchestrate the nodes in a machine learning pipeline.
3.2 Terms defined in this Recommendation
This Recommendation defines the following term:
3.2.1 network intelligence level: Level of application of automation capabilities including those
enabled by the integration of artificial intelligence techniques in the network.
4 Abbreviations and acronyms
This Recommendation uses the following abbreviations and acronyms:
AI Artificial Intelligence
API Application Programming Interface
CM Configuration Management
E2E End to End
eMBB Enhanced Mobile Broadband
ENI Experiential Networked Intelligence
ETSI European Telecommunications Standards Institute
GSM Global System for Mobile Communications
GSMA GSM Association
IoT Internet of Things
INR Interference and Noise
ISG Industry Specification Group
KPI Key Performance Indicator
MDT Minimization of Drive Tests
MIMO Multiple Input Multiple Output
ML Machine Learning
MLFO Machine Learning Function Orchestrator
mMTC Massive Machine Type Communications
NF Network Function
NHTSA National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
OAM Operation Administration and Maintenance
PM Performance Management
RCA Root Cause Analysis
RSRP Reference Signal Received Power
SAE Society of Automotive Engineers
SRC Source
TMF TM Forum
UE User Equipment
URLLC Ultra-Reliable and Low Latency Communications
5 Conventions
In this Recommendation:
The keywords "is required to" indicate a requirement which must be strictly followed and from
which no deviation is permitted, if conformance to this Recommendation is to be claimed.
The keywords "is recommended" indicate a requirement which is recommended but which is not
absolutely required. Thus, this requirement need not be present to claim conformance.
The keywords "can optionally" indicate an optional requirement which is permissible, without
implying any sense of being recommended. This term is not intended to imply that the vendor's
implementation must provide the option, and the feature can be optionally enabled by the network
operator/service provider. Rather, it means the vendor may optionally provide the feature and still
claim conformance with this Recommendation.
6 Introduction
6.1 Challenges in operation, administration and maintenance of IMT-2020 networks
Along with the network evolution to IMT-2020, key performance indicators (KPIs) such as the
transmission rate, transmission delay and connection scale are constantly being improved.
Application scenarios are becoming increasingly abundant, and the performance and flexibility of
networks are being improved. In addition, more and more network functions are deployed on cloud
computing platforms. This evolution enables flexible network orchestration, automated deployment,
improvement of resource utilization, and provisioning of network slicing services for verticals.
However, even though IMT-2020 brings a qualitative leap in performance and flexibility, the
complexity of networks is increasing significantly. This brings unprecedented challenges to the
operation, administration and maintenance (OAM) of IMT-2020 networks such as:
– The network architecture is more flexible, the network deployment scenarios are
diversified, and the user requirements are personalized, thus making networks more
dynamic and more complex to manage.
– The introduction of diversified terminals, such as in Internet of things (IoT), has led to
growth in the number of user equipment (UE) by orders of magnitude, thus the cost of
network management tends to increase.
– The use of manual decision-making mechanisms makes it difficult to quickly understand
any change in network conditions and to quickly adapt the network to such changes.
– Mechanisms for utilizing and analysing the large amount of network data generated daily
need to be deployed and operated in the networks, in order to produce value.
– The extensive use of network connectivity among UEs and things leads to high
requirements in terms of security and the protection of data being exchanged through
networks.
– The decoupling of software from the hardware in networks requires efficient management
solutions to realize high-frequency updates of software being used in these networks.
– Insufficient openness of network capabilities limits the efficient utilization of network
resources and the enhancement of user value.
– Given that service-based architecture is a key enabler for IMT-2020 networks, the evolution
of traditional network management towards a service-based intelligent network
management approach needs to be addressed.
To address the above-mentioned challenges, the introduction of automation mechanisms relying on
artificial intelligence (AI) including machine learning (ML) techniques is a key aspect to be
considered in network management systems. In order to solve the current efficiency and capability
problems of networks, introducing network intelligence is seen as a promising approach, in
particular:
– To achieve network self-maintenance, automatic optimization, intelligent operation and
high-efficiency OAM, AI including ML and other technologies for automation are
introduced.
– To derive value from mining of massive network data and to address security assurance
issues, AI (including ML) assisted data collection and analysis can further enhance the big
data analysis capability, enable timely identification of security risks, and strengthen
security measures.
– To address the problem of insufficient network openness, combining AI (including ML)
techniques and virtualization technologies can improve the management capabilities and
efficient use of network resources, shorten the implementation cycle of new technology
applications, and accelerate its iteration.
– To help in the evolution towards intelligent network management, an approach to enable
the use of AI including ML in networks is needed. [ITU-T Y.3172] describes an
architectural framework that supports such approach, including for intelligent network
management.
– Network intelligence levels may be used for specifying liability aspects in contractual
agreements (e.g., between network operators and network equipment suppliers). For
example, costs for network support contracts or insurance costs for network equipment may
be determined based on network intelligence levels.
6.2 Significance of evaluating network intelligence levels
As explained in clause 6.1, AI (including ML) is considered to be a promising technology to cope
with the increasing complexity and to improve the performance of future networks including
IMT-2020. As networks become more and more intelligent, it is important to adopt a standard
method for evaluating network intelligence levels.
A standard method for evaluating network intelligence levels has the following implications:
– It provides an evaluation basis for measuring the intelligence levels of a network and of its
components.
– It helps the industry to reach a consensual and unified understanding of network
intelligence concepts.
– It provides a reference for industry supervisors to formulate relevant strategies and
development planning of future networks including IMT-2020 in various countries.
– It provides a decision mechanism to operators, equipment vendors and other network
industry participants for planning of network technology features and products' roadmaps.
7 Methods for evaluating network intelligence levels
7.1 Dimensions for evaluating network intelligence levels
In order to evaluate network intelligence levels, this Recommendation makes use of the following
five widely applicable dimensions:
a) Demand mapping: This dimension corresponds to the process of converting configuration
or the adjustment of requirements from operation and maintenance teams into specific
instructions that network components can understand and execute.
NOTE – Examples of network component are network elements and network functions. Network
components are typically used in network subsystems.
b) Data collection: This dimension relates to the process of collecting network data required
by the various analysis processes.
c) Analysis: This dimension refers to the process of performing an analysis (including data
pre-processing) of collected networked data:
– to obtain context information of the network (perception analysis), e.g., current
operating environment, services, users and other information,
– to further predict based on historical data, the future trends in the change of the network
context information and make inference for decision (prediction analysis).
d) Decision: This dimension corresponds to the process that takes decisions about network
and/or service configuration based on the results of the analysis process.
e) Action implementation: This dimension is related to the process of executing
corresponding configuration triggered by the decision process.
Two main areas used for evaluating network intelligence levels are workflows (related to the whole
lifecycle of networks) and network subsystems (different classes of network components), since
these are mainly involved in the operation and deployment of networks.
NOTE 1 – The method used by the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) for describing automatic driving
levels provides a good reference for elaborating a method for evaluating network intelligence levels.
However, as described in Appendix I, the evaluation method for network intelligence levels is much more
complicated compared to the one used for automatic driving levels.
The overall network intelligence level of a whole network is a comprehensive reflection of
intelligence levels of the individual workflows and subsystems.
As shown in Figure 7-1, the five dimensions identified in clause 7.1 are applicable for evaluating
the network intelligence levels from both the workflow and subsystem perspectives. Figure 7-1
illustrates examples of possible workflows and subsystems to be considered for evaluating network
intelligence levels.
Figure 7-1 – Dimensions for evaluating network intelligence levels
The intelligence levels of individual workflows and subsystems can be determined based on the
above dimensions. Only when the intelligence levels of each subsystem and workflow reach or
exceed a certain level, then the intelligence level of the whole network can be regarded as reaching
the corresponding level.
The workflows and the subsystems may vary from use case to use case. Hence, network intelligence
capability levels when measured along a dimension may differ for each use case. Correspondingly,
the intelligence levels of the network can vary depending on the use cases being considered for
evaluation.
NOTE 2 – Appendix II describes various example use cases and their corresponding evaluation of
network intelligence levels.
7.2 Basic method for evaluating network intelligence levels
Based on the dimensions for the evaluation of network intelligence levels described in clause 7.1,
the basic method for network intelligence evaluation is described in two steps using Tables 7-1 and
7-2.
• Step 1: Evaluating the network intelligence capability level of each dimension
Network intelligence capability levels are identified by the following increasing order of
intelligence:
a) Human;
b) Human and System;
c) System.
Table 7-1 gives the conditions under which each dimension can be classified into a given network
intelligence capability level. In a use case scenario, this table can be used to determine the network
intelligence capability level for each of the five dimensions, the resulting determination being
provided as an input to Step 2.
Table 7-1 – Conditions for classifying dimensions into network intelligence capability levels
Dimensions Network intelligence capability level
Human Human and System System
Action Action implementation Action implementation Action implementation
implementation process is performed fully process is performed process is performed
by a human being. automatically by the automatically by the
system in at least one use system in all the use case
case scenario for the given scenarios for the given use
use case. case.
Data collection Data collection process is Data collection process is Data collection process is
performed fully by a performed automatically performed automatically
human being. by the system according by the system according
to data collecting rules to system defined data
defined by a human being. collecting rules.
Analysis Analysis process is Analysis process is Analysis process is
performed fully by a performed automatically performed automatically
human being. by the system according by the system according
to rules defined by a to system defined/learned
human being. rules.
Decision Decision process is Decision process is Decision process is
performed fully by a performed automatically performed automatically
human being. by the system according by the system according
to rules defined by a to system defined/learned
human being. rules.
Demand mapping Demand mapping process Demand mapping process Demand mapping process
is performed fully by a is performed is performed
human being. automatically by the automatically by the
system according to a system according to the
template defined by a intention of the use case.
human being.
• Step 2: Determining the overall network intelligence level
Table 7-2 provides a description of the network intelligence levels (L0 to L5).
Table 7-2 – Network intelligence levels
Network Dimensions
intelligence level
Action Data Analysis Decision Demand
implementation collection mapping
L0 Manual Human Human Human Human Human
network
operation
L1 Assisted Human and Human and Human Human Human
network System System
operation
L2 Preliminary System Human and Human and Human Human
intelligence System System
L3 Intermediate System System Human and Human and Human
intelligence System System
L4 Advanced System System System System Human and
intelligence System
L5 Full System System System System System
intelligence
NOTE 1 – For each network intelligence level, the decision process has to support intervention by human
being, i.e., decisions and execution instructions provided by a human being have the highest authority.
NOTE 2 – It is to be noted that this table may be used to only determine the network intelligence level for
each dimension (and not the overall network intelligence level).
For each dimension, each level (L0-L5) is characterized by a required network capability level (e.g.,
for the L3 level, the analysis dimension should be at the human and system network capability
level).
The per-dimension network intelligence capability levels obtained from Table 7-1 are used to
determine the overall network intelligence level for a given use case.
The overall network intelligence level is obtained as follows:
• Determining the per-dimension network intelligence level
– For a given dimension, the network intelligence level is determined by selecting the
highest network intelligence level among the multiple network intelligence levels (L0
to L5) identified in Table 7-2 that match the network intelligence capability level
evaluated for that dimension according to Step 1.
• Determining the overall network intelligence level
– The overall network intelligence level is then determined by selecting the minimum
per-dimension network intelligence level across all dimensions.
7.3 Requirements for evaluating network intelligence levels
ML-Int-level-001: The evaluation of network intelligence levels is required to be performed on the
following dimensions, as specified in clause 7.1: Action implementation, data collection, analysis,
decision and demand mapping.
ML-Int-level-002: For a given dimension, the evaluation of the corresponding network intelligence
level is required to result in one of the following network intelligence capability levels, as specified
in Table 7-1:
• Human;
• Human and System;
• System.
ML-Int-level-003: The network intelligence level evaluated for a given use case is required to
correspond to one of the following levels, as specified in Table 7-2:
• L0: Manual network operation;
• L1: Assisted network operation;
• L2: Preliminary intelligence;
• L3: Intermediate intelligence;
• L4: Advanced intelligence;
• L5: Full intelligence.
ML-Int-level-004: For a given dimension, the per-dimension network intelligence level is required
to be determined by selecting the highest network intelligence level among the multiple network
intelligence levels (L0 to L5) that match the network intelligence capability level evaluated for that
dimension as per ML-Int-level-002.ML-Int-level-005: For a given use case, the overall network
intelligence level is required to be determined by selecting the minimum level across all
per-dimension network intelligence levels determined as per ML-Int-level-004.
8 Architectural view on network intelligence level evaluation
This clause provides an architectural view for evaluating network intelligence levels. This includes:
– The mapping between the architectural requirements defined in [ITU-T Y.3172] and the
evaluation method described in clause 7;
– An architectural framework for network intelligence level evaluation;
– A key architectural scenario for evaluating network intelligence levels.
8.1 Mapping of architectural requirements
The following requirements from [ITU-T Y.3172] already identify a need to monitor and evaluate
network intelligence levels along with the functionalities provided by the network:
– REQ-ML-MNG-004 provides requirements for the management of all the ML
functionalities in the network.
– REQ-ML-DEP-004 provides requirements for dynamic plug-in of new sub-systems and
workflows (as source and sink).
NOTE – Appendix II.3 describes the application of the method for evaluating network intelligence level on
an alarm root cause analysis (RCA) and fault recovery. The upgrade of an existing RCA implementation may
include better intelligence functions and hence may increase the intelligence level of that workflow after the
upgrade (e.g., data collection for RCA may now be fully automated in the upgraded implementation). This is
an example of a potential change in the network which may necessitate monitoring corresponding changes in
the network intelligence capability levels and evaluate the network intelligence level accordingly.
8.2 Architectural framework for network intelligence level evaluation
In this clause, an architectural framework for evaluating the network intelligence levels of
components and workflows in a network is described taking into account the high-level
architectural framework for machine learning in future networks including IMT-2020
[ITU-T Y.3172].
Figure 8-1 highlights the introduction of monitoring and evaluation of network intelligence levels in
the architectural framework provided by [ITU-T Y.3172].
Figure 8-1 – Architectural framework for evaluating intelligence levels in the network
Although not shown in Figure 8-1, ML pipeline nodes in the ML pipeline subsystem
[ITU-T Y.3172] provide support for evaluating network intelligence levels according to the
dimensions described in clause 7.1. The data collection process is done by source (SRC) nodes, the
analysis and decision processes are performed by ML models and policy nodes, and the action
implementation process is supported by SINK nodes. In addition, the demand mapping process is
done using the ML intent provided as input to the MLFO.
The reference points in Figure 8-1 are described as follows:
3: The reference point between ML sandbox subsystem and an ML pipeline subsystem, used
unmodified as defined in [ITU-T Y.3172].
4: The reference point between ML pipeline subsystem and ML underlay networks corresponds
to the data handling reference point, used unmodified from [ITU-T Y.3172].
5, 6: The reference points between the management subsystem and, respectively, the ML pipeline
subsystem and the ML sandbox subsystem, are used for monitoring and evaluating network
intelligence levels in the ML pipeline subsystem and the ML sandbox subsystem.
7: The reference point between machine learning function orchestrator (MLFO) and other
management and orchestration functions of the management subsystem, defined in
[ITU-T Y.3172], allows the MLFO to monitor the capabilities of ML underlay networks with
respect to network intelligence.
8.3 Key architecture scenario for network intelligence level evaluation
This clause aims to describe the way the architecture framework portrayed in clause 8.2 can be
used. In doing so, the following key architecture scenario, as shown in Figure 8-2, is considered,
including the introduction of a ML-enabled network service in the network and query of network
intelligence levels.
The major steps in the sequence diagram are listed below:
• Pre-requisite: the management subsystem instantiates the network service.
• Declarative specification of the ML underlay is made in ML intent as defined in
[ITU-T Y.3172]. This is provided as an input to the MLFO.
• The MLFO parses the ML intent and instantiates the ML pipeline nodes (as defined in
[ITU-T Y.3172]). In addition, it parses the monitoring and network intelligence level
portion of the ML intent, and accordingly configures the monitoring reports in the ML
pipeline nodes.
• The ML pipeline nodes may send periodic or asynchronous reports to the MLFO on the
network intelligence levels and performance.
• Based on the reports provided by the ML pipeline nodes, the MLFO will respond to any
query from the operator about the network intelligence levels.
Figure 8-2 – Key architecture scenario for network intelligence level evaluation
The steps in the sequence diagram are as follows:
1: The MLFO parses the ML intent. It decides the type and position of ML functions.
NOTE 1 – For example, based on the requirements of the ML application specified in the
ML intent, the source node (SRC) may be placed in the access network.
2, 3: The MLFO uses reference point 7 to trigger the orchestrator (entity inside the "other
management and orchestration functions" – see Figure 8-1) to instantiate the ML functions
needed for this ML use case.
NOTE 2 – For example, data handling functions [b-ITU-T Y.3174] are instantiated along
with SRC and SINK nodes.
4: The MLFO decides the evaluation method and the plugin mentioned in the ML intent. The
monitoring requirements are also decided based on this ML intent.
NOTE 3 – For example, the SINK node is queried to evaluate the network intelligence capability
level of the action implementation dimension supported by the ML underlay.
5: The monitoring configuration is applied to the ML pipeline.
6: Monitoring reports from SRC node (s) in the ML pipeline are sent to the MLFO regarding
the data collection dimension. This may indicate specific dimensions and corresponding
network intelligence capabilities.
NOTE 4 – For example, a given SRC node gets the network intelligence capability level of the data
collection dimension from the network function (NF) which is associated with the SRC node. The
monitoring report from the SRC provides the intelligence capability level of the data collection
dimension supported by the ML underlay for this use case.
7: Monitoring reports from ML model nodes in the ML pipeline are sent to MLFO regarding
the analysis dimension.
NOTE 5 – For example, a given ML model node gets the network intelligence capability level of
the analysis dimension from the NF which is associated with the ML model. The monitoring report
from the ML model node provides the network intelligence capability level of the analysis
dimension supported by the ML underlay for this use case.
8: Monitoring reports from SINK nodes in the ML pipeline are sent regarding the action
implementation dimension.
NOTE 6 – For example, a given SINK node gets the network intelligence capability level of the
action implementation dimension from the NF which is associated with the SINK node. The
monitoring report from the SINK node provides the network intelligence capability level of the
action implementation dimension supported by the ML underlay for this use case.
9: Based on the received monitoring reports from the ML pipeline nodes, the MLFO
determines the network intelligence level for the use case, using the method described in this
Recommendation (see clause 7).
NOTE 7 – For example, based on the reports from the SINK nodes, the network intelligence
capability level of the action implementation dimension is determined as being, e.g., Level 2.
10, 11: A report is produced, or a query response is provided.
9 Security considerations
The security considerations in [ITU-T Y.3172] are applicable to this Recommendation.
Appendix I
Relation with work done in other standards or industry bodies
(This appendix does not form an integral part of this Recommendation.)
In this appendix, the relationship between the framework for evaluating network intelligence level
described in this Recommendation and the corresponding work in other standards or industry bodies
is discussed.
I.1 Automatic driving levels in SAE
Similar to the intelligent OAM requirements of networks in the telecommunications industry, the
automotive industry has identified clear requirements for automatic driving of motor vehicles and
has already carried out related research and industrialization work. Relevant research results from
the automotive industry can be used as reference for evaluating network intelligence level in future
networks including IMT-2020.
In 2014, the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) proposed the automatic driving levels in SAE
[b-SAE J3016], clarifying the 6-level automatic driving rating standard (L0～L5), which have
become widely accepted and used by the automotive industry. The SAE levels described in the
standard are shown in Table I.1.
Table I.1 – SAE J3016 automatic driving levels
SAE SAE name SAE narrative definition Execution Monitoring Fallback System
level of of driving performa capabilit
NHTSA level *
steering environme nce of y (driving
and nt dynamic modes)
accelerati driving
on/ task
decelerati
on
Human driver monitors the driving environment
0 No The full-time performance by Human Human Human n/a 0
automation the human driver of all driver driver driver
aspects of the dynamic
driving task, even when
enhanced by warning or
intervention systems.
1 Driver The driving mode-specific Human Human Human Some 1
assistance execution by a driver driver and driver driver driving
assistance system of either System modes
steering or
acceleration/deceleration
using information about the
driving environment and
with the expectation that the
human driver performs all
remaining aspects of the
dynamic driving task.
Table I.1 – SAE J3016 automatic driving levels
SAE SAE name SAE narrative definition Execution Monitoring Fallback System
level of of driving performa capabilit
NHTSA level *
steering environme nce of y (driving
and nt dynamic modes)
accelerati driving
on/ task
decelerati
on
2 Partial The driving mode-specific System Human Human Some 2
automation execution by one or more driver driver driving
driver assistance systems of modes
both steering and
acceleration/ deceleration
using information about the
driving environment and
with the expectation that the
human driver performs all
remaining aspects of the
dynamic driving task.
Automated driving system("system") monitors the driving environment
3 Conditional The driving mode-specific System System Human Some 3
automation performance by an driver driving
automated driving system of modes
all aspects of the dynamic
driving task with the
expectation that the human
driver will respond
appropriately to a request to
intervene.
4 High The driving mode-specific System System System Some ¾
automation performance by an driving
automated driving system of modes
all aspects of the dynamic
driving task, even if a human
driver does not respond
appropriately to a request to
intervene.
5 Full The full-time performance by System System System All
automation an automated driving system driving
of all aspects of the dynamic modes
driving task under all
roadway and environmental
conditions that can be
managed by a human driver.
* Note: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) early rating standards, now using
SAE standards
The SAE J3016 scheme determines the automatic driving level by evaluating the participation
degree of the driver and the automatic driving system from four evaluation dimensions: motion
control (acceleration/deceleration/steering), driving environment monitoring, fallback performance
of dynamic driving task, and system capability (driving modes).
The SAE J3016 standard is widely accepted by the automotive industry and applied to industry
analysis, product planning and publicity, guiding the automotive industry to carry out five stages of
work to achieving self-driving goals, and helping to form a unified understanding on concepts of
automatic driving, unpiloted driving, intelligent driving, etc.
As in the automotive industry, the intelligence level evaluation of telecommunication networks
involves multi-faceted aspects such as use cases, network domains, workflows and services.
Note that even though the automotive industry is a good example of intelligence grading, there are
some fundamental differences between the automotive industry and telecommunication industry,
including the following ones:
– Telecommunication service providers offer a broad range of services, each with varying
quality of service requirements, whereas the automotive industry provides a similar product
to a limited number of consumer segments.
– The end-user for the evaluation of intelligence level in the automotive industry is the
consumer and hence it is important to keep intelligence levels simple and easily
understandable and comparable. In the telecommunication industry, the situation is more
complex given that end-users for the evaluation of intelligence levels are not only
traditional consumers (end-users) of telecommunication services but typically include
network operators themselves, network equipment providers, supervisors (e.g., national
authorities), etc., who have different skills, expertise and experience. Such evaluation in the
telecommunication industry needs to consider different technical domains and underlying
service requirements.
I.2 AI and automation in GSMA
This clause describes the relation of the framework for evaluating intelligence level in future
networks including IMT-2020, described in this Recommendation, with a related GSM Association
(GSMA) specification [b-GSMA–AI].
The key points in [b-GSMA–AI] which are relevant to the framework described in this
Recommendation are:
• Ability to deploy new applications and services using open application programming
interfaces (API), transferrable analytics solutions, need for operation agility and efficiency,
the requirement for intelligent networks built upon AI (including ML) technologies.
NOTE 1 – The framework for evaluating intelligence level in future networks including IMT-2020,
described in this Recommendation, is built on the architectural framework for machine learning in
future networks including IMT-2020 described in [ITU-T Y.3172]. The evaluation of intelligence in
combination with the architectural framework [ITU-T Y.3172] helps to satisfy the requirement for
intelligent networks built upon AI (including ML) technologies.
• Network automation and intelligence, which is introduced as the fourth dimension of
IMT-2020 in addition to the other three fundamental dimensions (enhanced mobile
broadband (eMBB), ultra-Reliable and low latency communications (URLLC), massive
machine type communications (mMTC), will significantly improve operators' management
efficiency.
NOTE 2 – The framework for evaluating intelligence level in future networks including IMT-2020,
described in this Recommendation, includes evaluation of automation along with AI (including ML)
in various ML use cases. Thus, it enables measurement, evaluation and comparison of the networks
with respect to the fourth dimension.
• Automatic closed-loop under the operator provided intent or policy is introduced as the
cornerstone of network automation. This closed-loop must be cross-domain and per-domain
to address the challenges in managing future networks.
NOTE 3 – ML pipeline along with MLFO and ML sandbox [ITU-T Y.3172] allows an efficient
management of multi-level ML mechanism in operator's network. ML intent provides the ability to
provide operator's input and policy. In this Recommendation, it is further extended with the method
for evaluation of network intelligence level and corresponding architectural views.
A harmonized classification system and supporting definitions regarding intelligent network are
called for in [b-GSMA–AI]. This includes definition of intelligent network, identification of levels
of intelligent network, definitions and levels on functional aspects and a step-wise progression
through the levels.
This Recommendation attempts to specify these definitions and levels and describes the framework
to evaluate and progress the intelligence level of networks.
I.3 Autonomous networks in TM Forum
This clause describes the relation of the framework for evaluating network intelligence level in
future networks including IMT-2020, described in this Recommendation, with a related TM Forum
(TMF) [b-TMF-AUTO].
The key points in [b-TMF-AUTO] which are relevant to the framework described in this
Recommendation are:
• Framework for autonomous networks: this includes autonomous domains for network
transformation, network automation for operations transformation and business automation
for operations transformation. Operations automation with knowledge as a service is
identified as the core of production efficiency and business agility.
• The following characteristics of autonomous networks are described in [b-TMF-AUTO]:
Execution, awareness, analysis, decision, intent/experience, applicability.
• The following levels of autonomous networks are described in [b-TMF-AUTO]:
L0: manual operation and maintenance, L1: assisted operation and maintenance, L2: partial
autonomous network, L3: conditional autonomous network, L4: high autonomous network,
L5: full autonomous network.
NOTE – The TMF framework is compatible with the approach presented in this Recommendation
where the multi-level ML pipeline and corresponding architecture is used as a basis to enable closed
loop automation across domains and per-domain. In addition, the autonomous network levels
defined in [b-TMF-AUTO] are compatible with the levels of intelligence defined in this
Recommendation.
I.4 Autonomous networks in ETSI ISG ENI
This clause describes the relation of the framework for evaluating network intelligence level in
future networks including IMT-2020, described in this Recommendation, with the European
Telecommunication Standards Institute (ETSI) Industry Specification Group (ISG) Experiential
Networked Intelligence (ENI) definition of categories for AI application to networks.
The following categories of AI-based network automation are defined in [b-ETSI ENI 007]:
• Category 0. Manual O&M
• Category 1. Assisted O&M
• Category 2. Partial automation
• Category 3. Conditional automation
• Category 4. High automation
• Category 5. Fully autonomic system
The factors affecting the network autonomicity level from a technical point of view are identified as
man-machine interface, decision making participation, data collection and analysis, degree of
intelligence and environment adaptability.
The factors affecting the network autonomicity level from a market point of view are identified as
scheduling execution, perception monitoring, analysis and decision-making, customer experience
and system capability. These are mapped to the categories described above based on the level of
participation of human-operator.
NOTE – The framework described in this Recommendation relates to the network autonomicity level from a
technical point of view as defined by [b-ETSI ENI 007], considered along with the level of participation of
human being operator.
Appendix II
Application of the method for evaluating network intelligence level on
representative use cases
(This appendix does not form an integral part of this Recommendation.)
This appendix describes the application of the method for evaluating network intelligence level on
the following representative use cases:
• network coverage optimization,
• network cutover,
• alarm RCA and fault recovery,
• network resource maintenance and management,
• end to end (E2E) IoT service for utilities.
For each use case, the specific network intelligence capability level of each dimension is assumed,
and the evaluation result of each dimension is highlighted in the use case table.
NOTE – For a given dimension, the highest network intelligence level is selected (see Table 7-2) among all
the multiple network intelligence levels that match the identified network intelligence capability level. For
example, for the "Action Implementation" dimension, L5 is selected even though L2, L3, L4 and L5 all
match the "System" network intelligence capability level.
Based on the evaluation table given below for the use case, the overall network intelligence level
for the use case is determined. Suggestions concerning possible upgrading of the network
intelligence levels are also provided for each use case.
II.1 Network coverage optimization
This clause describes the application of the method for evaluating network intelligence level on
network coverage optimization workflow.
Evaluation assumptions
The intelligence capabilities of each dimension of this use case are assumed to be evaluated as
follows:
• Demand mapping: Human
Rationale: Network coverage optimization demand mapping from coverage optimizing
requirements to detailed work plan is manually completed by human (operator).
• Data collection: Human and System
Rationale: Human (operator) decides which data to collect (e.g., measurement report, key
performance indicators (KPI), site information), system periodically collect specified data.
For some area, coverage related data is automatically collected by system according to
human defined minimization of drive tests (MDT) tasks.
• Analysis: Human and System
Rationale: Network coverage problem is automatically discovered by system according to
human defined rules (e.g., using static thresholds and formulas), coverage optimization
related solution can be suggested by system with the help of expert system.
• Decision: Human
Rationale: Coverage optimization solution is reviewed and decided by human (operator).
Instructions of coverage related adjustment are issued by human (operator).
• Action implementation: System
Rationale: System automatically executes the new parameters according to instructions of
coverage related adjustment.
Evaluation results
Table II.1 provides the result of the evaluation according to the above assumptions.
Table II.1 – Evaluation of network intelligence level on network coverage optimization
Level/Name vs Action Data collection Analysis Decision Demand
Evaluation implementation mapping
dimensions
L0 Manual Human Human Human Human Human
network
operation
L1 Assisted Human and Human and Human Human Human
network System System
operation
L2 Preliminary System Human and Human and Human Human
intelligence System System
L3 Intermediate System System Human and Human and Human
intelligence System System
L4 Advanced System System System System Human and
intelligence System
L5 Full System System System System System
intelligence
Per-dimension network intelligence levels are assumed to have been evaluated as shown in
Table II.1, the result of the evaluation being highlighted with orange coloured cells. ML-Int-level-
004 from clause 7.3 is used to arrive at per-dimension network intelligence levels. By applying ML-
Int-level-005 from clause 7.3 on Table II.1, this use case on network coverage optimization has a
Level 2 (Preliminary Intelligence) overall network intelligence level.
Upgrading suggestions
To upgrade to the next network intelligence level, the data collection process would need to be
completed automatically by the system according to system defined data collecting rules awhile the
decision process would need to be completed automatically by the system according to human
being defined rules.
For example, massive multiple input multiple output (MIMO) is a key technology in radio network
to deliver higher capacity and coverage. However, there are technical roadblocks to efficiently tune
massive MIMO using automatic data collection and decision. One of the challenges comes from a
fast selection and optimization of the appropriate beam pattern. KPIs such as the antenna tilt, the
reference signal received power (RSRP), the interference and noise (INR) can be monitored and
analysed automatically to select the best beam pattern based on AI which allows a learning and
iterative approach. Thus, adding capability for automatic data collection and decision would raise
the network intelligence level of the use case and hence enable better network coverage.
II.2 Network cutover
This clause describes the application of the method for evaluating network intelligence level on
network cutover workflow.
Evaluation assumptions
The intelligence capabilities of each dimension of this use case are assumed to be evaluated as
follows:
• Demand mapping: Human
Rationale: Manual analysis of current situations and the demand necessity are needed to
convert the cutover operations into network operations.
• Data collection: Human and System
Rationale: Cutover related data (e.g., Alarm, Configuration, Log, external) are collected by
system. Humans decide which data to collect.
• Analysis: Human and System
Rationale: Analysis for network cutover is performed with the assistance of system based
on rules pre-set by humans.
• Decision: Human
Rationale: The decision is reviewed and decided by humans.
• Action implementation: System
Rationale: Based on the decision outcome, system automatically completes the cutover
execution.
Evaluation results
Table II.2 provides the result of the evaluation according to the above assumptions.
Table II.2 – Evaluation of network intelligence level on network cutover
Level/Name vs
Action Demand
Evaluation Data collection Analysis Decision
implementation mapping
dimensions
Manual Human Human Human Human Human
network
L0 operation
Assisted Human and Human and Human Human Human
network System System
L1 operation
Preliminary System Human and Human and Human Human
L2 intelligence System System
Intermediate System System Human and Human and Human
L3 intelligence System System
Advanced System System System System Human and
L4 intelligence System
Full System System System System System
L5 intelligence
Per-dimension network intelligence levels are assumed to have been evaluated as shown in
Table II.2, the result of the evaluation being highlighted with orange coloured cells. ML-Int-level-
004 from clause 7.3 is used to arrive at per-dimension network intelligence level. Also, applying
ML-Int-level-005 from clause 7.3 on the evaluation Table II.2, this use case on network cutover has
a Level 2 (Preliminary Intelligence) overall network intelligence level.
Based on the evaluation table this use case is currently at Level 2 (Preliminary Intelligence). To
reach Level 3 (Intermediate Intelligence), the system should implement automatic data collection
and decision.
II.3 Alarm RCA and fault recovery
This clause describes the application of the method for evaluating network intelligence level on an
alarm root cause analysis (RCA) and fault recovery.
Evaluation assumptions
The intelligence capabilities of each dimension of this use case are assumed to be evaluated as
follows:
• Demand mapping: Human and System
Rationale: For specific alarm and fault types, based on the pre-set rules, alarm and fault
recovery demand mapping is completed by the system. Demand mapping about fault
prediction and early warning is manually completed by a human operator.
• Data collection: System
Rationale: The system can automatically collect the data (e.g., configuration management
(CM), Alarm, performance management (PM), etc.) needed for alarm RCA according to
system defined data collecting rules.
• Analysis: Human and System
Rationale: For specific alarm and fault types, the system can summarize the generated
analysis rules (e.g., data pre-processing rules, analysis of formulas and thresholds, etc.)
based on experts' experience, assist manual alarm RCA, generate association rules. The
above alarm RCA rules are updated manually.
• Decision: Human and System
Rationale: For some specific alarm and fault types, based on the association rules and fault
recovery proposals, the system can automatically decide the alarm root cause and fault
recovery solution.
• Action implementation: System
Rationale: Based on the decision outcome, system can automatically perform alarm
filtering and root cause association and perform specific operations in the fault recovery
solution.
Evaluation results
Table II.3 provides the result of the evaluation according to the above assumptions.
Table II.3 – Evaluation of network intelligence level on alarm RCA and fault recovery
Level/Name vs Action Data Analysis Decision Demand
Evaluation implementation collection mapping
dimensions
L0 Manual Human Human Human Human Human
network
operation
L1 Assisted Human and Human and Human Human Human
network System System
operation
L2 Preliminary System Human and Human and Human Human
intelligence System System
L3 Intermediate System System Human and Human and Human
intelligence System System
L4 Advanced System System System System Human and
intelligence System
L5 Full System System System System System
intelligence
Per-dimension network intelligence levels are assumed to have been evaluated as shown in
Table II.3, the result of the evaluation being highlighted with orange coloured cells. ML-Int-level-
004 from clause 7.3 is used to arrive at per-dimension network intelligence level. Also, applying
ML-Int-level-005 from clause 7.3 on the evaluation Table II.3, this use case on alarm root cause
analysis and fault recovery has a Level 2 (Preliminary Intelligence) overall network intelligence
level.
Based on the evaluation table, alarm RCA and fault recovery use case are at Level 3 (Intermediate
intelligence). To upgrade to the next level, the analysis and decision processes would need to be
completed automatically by the system according to system defined rules. For example, utilizing AI
for correlation analysis of multi-dimensional data (e.g., alarm, performance, and network data),
accurate location of alarm root cause and fault self-healing could be reached successfully.
II.4 Network resource maintenance and management
This clause describes the application of the method for evaluating network intelligence level on the
network resource maintenance and management workflow.
Evaluation assumptions
The intelligence capabilities of each dimension of this use case are assumed to be evaluated as
follows:
• Demand mapping: Human
Rationale: Translation on the requirements of network resource maintenance and
management (e.g., resource allocation or customization for service providing and
deployment) to detailed execution plan is manually completed by human (operator).
• Data collection: Human and System
Rationale: Resource related data (e.g., physical resource data, logical resource data) of
which to be collected are decided by human (operator). In certain cases, resource related
data are collected automatically by the system based on predefined rules by human.
• Analysis: Human and System
Rationale: Query and analysis on the collected resource data are performed based on
human-defined criteria with the help of expert system to generate solutions for resource
maintenance and management.
• Decision: Human
Rationale: The solution to perform resource maintenance and management (e.g., specific
resource allocation for network slicing or routing adjustment) is reviewed and decided by
human (operator).
• Action implementation: System
Rationale: The system can automatically perform resource allocation or change based on
the decision result.
Evaluation results
Table II.4 provides the result of the evaluation according to the above assumptions.
Table II.4 – Evaluation of network intelligence level on network
resource maintenance and management
Level/Name vs Action Data Analysis Decision Demand
Evaluation implementation collection mapping
dimensions
L0 Manual Human Human Human Human Human
network
operation
L1 Assisted Human and Human and Human Human Human
network System System
operation
L2 Preliminary System Human and Human and Human Human
intelligence System System
L3 Intermediate System System Human and Human and Human
intelligence System System
L4 Advanced System System System System Human and
intelligence System
L5 Full System System System System System
intelligence
Per-dimension network intelligence levels are assumed to have been evaluated as shown in
Table II.4, the result of the evaluation being highlighted with orange coloured cells. ML-Int-level-
004 from clause 7.3 is used to arrive at per-dimension network intelligence level. Also, applying
ML-Int-level-005 from clause 7.3 on the evaluation Table II.4, this use case on network resource
maintenance and management has a Level 2 (Preliminary Intelligence) overall network intelligence
level.
To upgrade to a higher level, the capability of related dimensions would have to be improved
accordingly. For example, to advance to Level 3 (Intermediate Intelligence), the data collection
process would need to be completed automatically by the system with system defined rules while
the decision process would need to be completed automatically by the system with human being
defined rules.
II.5 E2E IoT service for utilities
This clause describes the application of the method for evaluating network intelligence level on E2E
IoT service for utilities.
Evaluation assumptions
The intelligence capabilities of each dimension of this use case are assumed to be evaluated as
follows:
• Demand mapping: Human
Rationale: Service planning and deployment of IoT service is manually completed by a
human operator.
• Data collection: Human and System
Rationale: Human operator decides which data to collect for some data sources (e.g., PM,
CM, alarm, probe, external), system periodically reports back the specified data. Some data
sources (e.g., event traces) are initiated by human operator which may be for a limited time
or a region.
• Analysis: Human and System
Rationale: Service assurance evaluations (such as anomaly detection, trend analysis,
coverage gap, utilization) are performed by the system based on pre-set rules by human
operator.
• Decision: Human and System
Rationale: Human operator defines policies to specify required action based on analysis
results. E.g., a human-defined rule to delay data transmission to off-peak hours is triggered
by the system when network utilization exceeds a threshold.
• Action implementation: System
Rationale: Based on the decision outcome, system automatically modifies required device
parameters over the air interface.
Evaluation results
Table II.5 provides the result of the evaluation according to the above assumptions.
Table II.5 – Evaluation of network intelligence level on E2E IoT service for utilities
Level/Name vs Action Data Analysis Decision Demand
Evaluation implementation collection mapping
dimensions
L0 Manual Human Human Human Human Human
network
operation
L1 Assisted Human and Human and Human Human Human
network System System
operation
L2 Preliminary System Human and Human and Human Human
intelligence System System
L3 Intermediate System System Human and Human and Human
intelligence System System
Table II.5 – Evaluation of network intelligence level on E2E IoT service for utilities
Level/Name vs Action Data Analysis Decision Demand
Evaluation implementation collection mapping
dimensions
L4 Advanced System System System System Human &
intelligence System
L5 Full System System System System System
intelligence
Per-dimension network intelligence levels are assumed to have been evaluated as shown in
Table II.5, the result of the evaluation being highlighted with orange coloured cells. ML-Int-level-
004 from clause 7.3 is used to arrive at per-dimension network intelligence level. Also, applying
ML-Int-level-005 from clause 7.3 on the evaluation Table II-1, this use case on E2E IoT service for
utilities has a Level 2 (Preliminary Intelligence) overall network intelligence level.
The system needs to decide which data source would have to be activated for analysis to advance to
Level 3 (Intermediate Intelligence). To further advance to Level 4 (Advanced Intelligence), the
analysis and decision processes would need to be automatically done by the system and service
planning and the deployment workflow would need to be automated using pre-specified templates.
To reach Level 5 (Full Intelligence), intent-based service planning and deployment would need to
be implemented.
Bibliography
[b-ITU-T Y.3100] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3100 (2017), Terms and definitions for
IMT-2020 network.
[b-ITU-T Y.3174] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3174, Framework for data handling to enable
machine learning in future networks including IMT-2020.
[b-SAE J3016] SAE J3016_201401, Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to On-
Road Motor Vehicle Automated Driving Systems.
[b-GSMA–AI] AI & Automation: An Overview.
<https://www.gsma.com/future networks/wiki/ai-automation-an-overview/.>
[b-TMF-AUTO] A whitepaper of autonomous networks: empowering digital transformation
for the telecoms industry.
<https://www.tmforum.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/22553-Autonomous-Networks-
whitepaper.pdf.>
[b-ETSI ENI 007] ETSI GR ENI 007 V1.1.1 (2009); Experiential Networked Intelligence
(ENI); ENI Definition of Categories for AI Application to Networks.
SERIES OF ITU-T RECOMMENDATIONS
Series A Organization of the work of ITU-T
Series D Tariff and accounting principles and international telecommunication/ICT economic and policy
issues
Series E Overall network operation, telephone service, service operation and human factors
Series F Non-telephone telecommunication services
Series G Transmission systems and media, digital systems and networks
Series H Audiovisual and multimedia systems
Series I Integrated services digital network
Series J Cable networks and transmission of television, sound programme and other multimedia signals
Series K Protection against interference
Series L Environment and ICTs, climate change, e-waste, energy efficiency; construction, installation
and protection of cables and other elements of outside plant
Series M Telecommunication management, including TMN and network maintenance
Series N Maintenance: international sound programme and television transmission circuits
Series O Specifications of measuring equipment
Series P Telephone transmission quality, telephone installations, local line networks
Series Q Switching and signalling, and associated measurements and tests
Series R Telegraph transmission
Series S Telegraph services terminal equipment
Series T Terminals for telematic services
Series U Telegraph switching
Series V Data communication over the telephone network
Series X Data networks, open system communications and security
Series Y Global information infrastructure, Internet protocol aspects, next-generation networks,
Internet of Things and smart cities
Series Z Languages and general software aspects for telecommunication systems
Printed in Switzerland
Geneva, 2020
