I n t e r n a t i o n a l T e l e c o m m u n i c a t i o n U n i o n
ITU-T Y.3181
TELECOMMUNICATION (09/2022)
STANDARDIZATION SECTOR
OF ITU
SERIES Y: GLOBAL INFORMATION
INFRASTRUCTURE, INTERNET PROTOCOL ASPECTS,
NEXT-GENERATION NETWORKS, INTERNET OF
THINGS AND SMART CITIES
Future networks
Architectural framework for machine learning
sandbox in future networks including IMT-2020
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3181
ITU-T Y-SERIES RECOMMENDATIONS
GLOBAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE, INTERNET PROTOCOL ASPECTS, NEXT-GENERATION
NETWORKS, INTERNET OF THINGS AND SMART CITIES
GLOBAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE
General Y.100–Y.199
Services, applications and middleware Y.200–Y.299
Network aspects Y.300–Y.399
Interfaces and protocols Y.400–Y.499
Numbering, addressing and naming Y.500–Y.599
Operation, administration and maintenance Y.600–Y.699
Security Y.700–Y.799
Performances Y.800–Y.899
INTERNET PROTOCOL ASPECTS
General Y.1000–Y.1099
Services and applications Y.1100–Y.1199
Architecture, access, network capabilities and resource management Y.1200–Y.1299
Transport Y.1300–Y.1399
Interworking Y.1400–Y.1499
Quality of service and network performance Y.1500–Y.1599
Signalling Y.1600–Y.1699
Operation, administration and maintenance Y.1700–Y.1799
Charging Y.1800–Y.1899
IPTV over NGN Y.1900–Y.1999
NEXT GENERATION NETWORKS
Frameworks and functional architecture models Y.2000–Y.2099
Quality of Service and performance Y.2100–Y.2199
Service aspects: Service capabilities and service architecture Y.2200–Y.2249
Service aspects: Interoperability of services and networks in NGN Y.2250–Y.2299
Enhancements to NGN Y.2300–Y.2399
Network management Y.2400–Y.2499
Computing power networks Y.2500–Y.2599
Packet-based Networks Y.2600–Y.2699
Security Y.2700–Y.2799
Generalized mobility Y.2800–Y.2899
Carrier grade open environment Y.2900–Y.2999
FUTURE NETWORKS Y.3000–Y.3499
CLOUD COMPUTING Y.3500–Y.3599
BIG DATA Y.3600–Y.3799
QUANTUM KEY DISTRIBUTION NETWORKS Y.3800–Y.3999
INTERNET OF THINGS AND SMART CITIES AND COMMUNITIES
General Y.4000–Y.4049
Definitions and terminologies Y.4050–Y.4099
Requirements and use cases Y.4100–Y.4249
Infrastructure, connectivity and networks Y.4250–Y.4399
Frameworks, architectures and protocols Y.4400–Y.4549
Services, applications, computation and data processing Y.4550–Y.4699
Management, control and performance Y.4700–Y.4799
Identification and security Y.4800–Y.4899
Evaluation and assessment Y.4900–Y.4999
For further details, please refer to the list of ITU-T Recommendations.
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3181
Architectural framework for machine learning sandbox in
future networks including IMT-2020
Summary
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3181 provides an architectural framework for machine learning (ML)
sandbox in future networks including IMT-2020. More precisely, it describes requirements and
high-level architecture for ML sandbox in future networks including IMT-2020.
History
Edition Recommendation Approval Study Group Unique ID*
1.0 ITU-T Y.3181 2022-09-29 13 11.1002/1000/15058
Keywords
High-level architecture, IMT-2020, machine learning, requirement, sandbox, simulator.
* To access the Recommendation, type the URL http://handle.itu.int/ in the address field of your web
browser, followed by the Recommendation's unique ID. For example, http://handle.itu.int/11.1002/1000/11
830-en.
Rec. ITU-T Y.3181 (09/2022) i
FOREWORD
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is the United Nations specialized agency in the field of
telecommunications, information and communication technologies (ICTs). The ITU Telecommunication
Standardization Sector (ITU-T) is a permanent organ of ITU. ITU-T is responsible for studying technical,
operating and tariff questions and issuing Recommendations on them with a view to standardizing
telecommunications on a worldwide basis.
The World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (WTSA), which meets every four years, establishes
the topics for study by the ITU-T study groups which, in turn, produce Recommendations on these topics.
The approval of ITU-T Recommendations is covered by the procedure laid down in WTSA Resolution 1.
In some areas of information technology which fall within ITU-T's purview, the necessary standards are
prepared on a collaborative basis with ISO and IEC.
NOTE
In this Recommendation, the expression "Administration" is used for conciseness to indicate both a
telecommunication administration and a recognized operating agency.
Compliance with this Recommendation is voluntary. However, the Recommendation may contain certain
mandatory provisions (to ensure, e.g., interoperability or applicability) and compliance with the
Recommendation is achieved when all of these mandatory provisions are met. The words "shall" or some other
obligatory language such as "must" and the negative equivalents are used to express requirements. The use of
such words does not suggest that compliance with the Recommendation is required of any party.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
ITU draws attention to the possibility that the practice or implementation of this Recommendation may involve
the use of a claimed Intellectual Property Right. ITU takes no position concerning the evidence, validity or
applicability of claimed Intellectual Property Rights, whether asserted by ITU members or others outside of
the Recommendation development process.
As of the date of approval of this Recommendation, ITU had not received notice of intellectual property,
protected by patents/software copyrights, which may be required to implement this Recommendation.
However, implementers are cautioned that this may not represent the latest information and are therefore
strongly urged to consult the appropriate ITU-T databases available via the ITU-T website at
http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/ipr/.
© ITU 2022
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, by any means whatsoever, without the prior
written permission of ITU.
ii Rec. ITU-T Y.3181 (09/2022)
Table of Contents
Page
Rec. ITU-T Y.3181 (09/2022) iii
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3181
Architectural framework for machine learning sandbox in
future networks including IMT-2020
1 Scope
This Recommendation provides an architectural framework for the machine learning (ML) sandbox
in the context of integrating machine learning in future networks including IMT-2020. This
Recommendation provides requirements and high-level architecture of the ML sandbox.
Architectural components along with corresponding reference points and application programming
interfaces (APIs) are specified.
2 References
The following ITU-T Recommendations and other references contain provisions which, through
reference in this text, constitute provisions of this Recommendation. At the time of publication, the
editions indicated were valid. All Recommendations and other references are subject to revision; users
of this Recommendation are therefore encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most
recent edition of the Recommendations and other references listed below. A list of the currently valid
ITU-T Recommendations is regularly published. The reference to a document within this
Recommendation does not give it, as a stand-alone document, the status of a Recommendation.
[ITU-T Y.2701] Recommendation ITU-T Y.2701 (2007), Security requirements for NGN
release 1.
[ITU-T Y.3101] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3101 (2018), Requirements of the IMT-2020
network.
[ITU-T Y.3172] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3172 (2019), Architectural framework for
machine learning in future networks including IMT-2020.
[ITU-T Y.3173] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3173 (2020), Framework for evaluating
intelligence levels of future networks including IMT-2020.
[ITU-T Y.3174] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3174 (2020), Framework for data handling to
enable machine learning in future networks including IMT-2020.
[ITU-T Y.3176] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3176 (2020), Machine learning marketplace
integration in future networks including IMT-2020.
[ITU-T Y.3179] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3179 (2021), Architectural framework for
machine learning model serving in future networks including IMT-2020.
3 Definitions
3.1 Terms defined elsewhere
This Recommendation uses the following terms defined elsewhere:
3.1.1 machine learning model [ITU-T Y.3172]: Model created by applying machine learning
techniques to data to learn from.
3.1.2 machine learning pipeline [ITU-T Y.3172]: A set of logical nodes, each with specific
functionalities, that can be combined to form a machine learning application in a telecommunication
network.
3.1.3 machine learning sandbox [ITU-T Y.3172]: An environment in which machine learning
models can be trained and their effects tested on the network evaluated.
3.1.4 machine learning function orchestrator [ITU-T Y.3172]: A logical node with
functionalities that manage and orchestrate the nodes in a machine learning pipeline.
3.1.5 machine learning marketplace [ITU-T Y.3176]: A component that provides capabilities
facilitating the exchange and delivery of machine learning models among multiple parties.
NOTE 1 – Examples of parties include suppliers and users of ML models. Capabilities provided to users of
ML models include functionalities to find, learn about, deploy (or download), and use ML models. Capabilities
provided to suppliers of ML models (e.g., data scientists) include functionalities to share (on-board, upload),
describe (learn about), and market their ML models.
NOTE 2 – A network operator may use a machine learning marketplace deployed internally and/or externally
to the network operator's administrative domains. Internal and external marketplaces differ only in the
deployment perspective. A marketplace that is internal to a network operator may act as an external
marketplace to another network operator and vice versa.
3.1.6 machine learning model metadata [ITU-T Y.3176]: Information that describes the
characteristics of a machine learning model.
NOTE – Machine learning model metadata includes, but is not limited to, the name of the ML model, ML
model's author, version of the ML model, license information of the ML model, description of the data inputs
and outputs of the ML model, and runtime environment of the ML model.
3.1.7 machine learning model serving [ITU-T Y.3179]: A process of preparing and deploying
machine learning models in different deployment environments to enable the application of model
inference to machine learning underlay networks.
3.1.8 network intelligence level [ITU-T Y.3173]: Level of application of the automation
capabilities including those enabled by the integration of artificial intelligence techniques in the
network.
3.2 Terms defined in this Recommendation
This Recommendation defines the following terms:
3.2.1 evaluation ML pipeline: Chaining of pipeline nodes and simulated network functions (NFs)
with served machine learning (ML) models whose goal is to evaluate a particular ML use case.
3.2.2 simulation component metadata: Data describing the characteristics of a particular
simulation component.
NOTE – Examples of simulation component metadata are capabilities of the simulated NFs, configurable
parameters, performance indicators, monitored parameters and interfaces.
3.2.3 simulation environment metadata: Data describing the characteristics of a particular
simulation environment.
NOTE 1 – Simulation environment metadata can contain information such as installation/execution
requirements, simulation component metadata, performance indicators, connections and maturity indicators
(e.g., alpha/beta versions).
NOTE 2 – Examples of formats for representing simulation environment metadata are JavaScript object
notation (JSON) [b-IETF RFC 8259], comma-separated values (CSV) [b-IETF RFC 4180], or extensible
markup language (XML) [b-XML].
3.2.4 simulation profile: A list of parameters and their values which describe the machine learning
(ML) use case to be trained, evaluated, or tested at the ML sandbox.
NOTE – The list of parameters and their values may be derived from the ML intent [ITU-T Y.3172] and the
simulation environment metadata.
4 Abbreviations and acronyms
This Recommendation uses the following abbreviations and acronyms:
AF Application Function
AI Artificial Intelligence
AP Access Point
API Application Programming Interface
DBr Data Broker
DH Data Handling
DM Data Model
GAN Generative Adversarial Network
KPI Key Performance Indicator
ML Machine Learning
MLFO Machine Learning Function Orchestrator
NF Network Function
RAN Radio Access Network
RL Reinforcement Learning
SL Supervised Learning
UE User Equipment
UL Unsupervised Learning
uRLLC Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communication
V2X Vehicle-to-Everything
WLAN Wireless Local Area Network
5 Conventions
In this Recommendation:
– The keywords "is required to" indicate a requirement which must be strictly followed and
from which no deviation is permitted, if conformance to this Recommendation is to be
claimed.
– The keywords "is recommended" indicate a requirement which is recommended but which
is not absolutely required. Thus, this requirement need not be present to claim conformance.
– The keywords "can optionally" indicate an optional requirement which is permissible,
without implying any sense of being recommended. This term is not intended to imply that
the vendor's implementation must provide the option, and the feature can be optionally
enabled by the network operator/service provider. Rather, it means the vendor may optionally
provide the feature and still claim conformance with this Recommendation.
– The colour "solid blue" is used in Figure 2 and Figure 3 to indicate components and interfaces
that are newly defined in this Recommendation.
– ML pipeline – In this Recommendation, in alignment with the conventions of
[ITU-T Y.3172] when the symbol shown in Figure 1 is used, this denotes a subset (including
proper subset) of nodes in an ML pipeline. When this symbol is used in a figure, the symbol
stands for the subset of an ML pipeline's nodes not explicitly shown in that figure.
Figure 1 – Symbol used to denote a subset of nodes in an ML pipeline
6 Introduction
The integration of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) has been identified as one
of the key features of future networks. However, network operators have the challenge of maintaining
the operational performance and associated key performance indicators during or after this
integration. In addition, the introduction of ML techniques to IMT-2020 networks may raise concerns
regarding the transparency, reliability, and availability of the ML methods, techniques and data.
Studying the trade-offs, advantages, and disadvantages while integrating various ML mechanisms is
important to understand their impact on the network. For example, reducing the generalization error
is the main concern in applying any kind of supervised learning (SL) approach, which can be high
even if the test error is kept low (this phenomenon is commonly known as overfitting). Similarly,
unsupervised learning (UL) aims to find patterns from data without any guidance (unlabelled data)
and hence lacks validation. On the other hand, reinforcement learning (RL) is based on the learning-
by-experience paradigm. RL has been shown to be of great utility for single-agent approaches in
controlled scenarios, however notable adverse effects can appear as a result of the competition raised
by multiple systems sharing the same resources (e.g., while providing heterogeneous services using
common network resources).
Thus, all kinds of learning can lead to unexpected and/or undesired behaviour in live networks. Even
if the performance of networking systems can be improved by ML techniques in the long term, it is
safe to assume that the system will unavoidably experience certain performance degradation during
a transitory regime. In some situations, this degradation of key performance indicators (KPI) may be
unacceptable for network operators, especially for demanding requirements of certain network-
oriented applications such as ultra-reliable low-latency communication (uRLLC) applications. In
other cases, the network may change quickly and may not reach a stable, long-term regime that is
expected to optimize the network's performance.
NOTE – The transitory regime precedes the stability phase of an ML model when applied to a network.
Performance degradation can result from potential delays in serving models in the network, or from trying
suboptimal configurations during exploration periods in online learning.
Given the instability that ML methods can generate in communications systems, which can be
particularly exacerbated in online mechanisms including exploration phases, the sandbox subsystem
[ITU-T Y.3172] emerges as a promising solution for training, testing, and evaluating the performance
of ML models before being deployed in live networks. The ML sandbox is an isolated environment
in which machine learning models can be evaluated. The ML sandbox is therefore meant to reproduce
the behaviour / operation of live networking systems, thereby improving the robustness and resilience
of future ML-enabled networking systems. ML sandbox includes a managed test network (e.g., a
testbed) or a software-based environment (e.g., using a simulator or an emulator). Software-based
network environments can be particularly useful to overcome the limitations of limited training data
sets and laboratory-based testbeds. For instance, simulators can be used to frame cases that have not
been noticed before (i.e., anomalies), which would contribute to enabling failure prediction, anomaly
detection and self-healing.
Through the management subsystem, network operators can manage the ML sandbox and thereby
address the challenges posed by ML-driven solutions for networks. The interfaces between the
machine learning function orchestrator (MLFO) and the ML sandbox allow the manageability of the
replicated network environment (e.g., simulation), the execution of test cases and the evaluation of
ML models.
7 Requirements
The requirements for the ML sandbox's architectural framework are divided into the following
categories:
• Simulated ML underlay requirements
• Operational requirements
• Communication requirements
• Metadata requirements
7.1 Simulated ML underlay requirements
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-001: The ML sandbox is required to simulate heterogeneous sources of data
(SRCs) and sinks (SINKs) of an ML output.
NOTE 1 – SRCs and SINKs simulated in the ML sandbox include those within the IMT-2020 network as well
as application functionalities hosted in the network slices. Examples of application functionalities hosted in
the network slices are vehicle-to-everything (V2X) applications, Industry 4.0 applications and emergency
applications.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-002: The ML sandbox is required to support the dynamic instantiation of new
simulated SRCs and/or SINK nodes.
NOTE 2 – Instantiation of new simulated SRCs and SINK nodes is managed by the MLFO.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-003: The ML sandbox is required to consider policy inputs from the operator
while configuring the simulated ML underlay networks [ITU-T Y.3172].
NOTE 3 – Examples of policy inputs are those related to conflict resolution and resource management.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-004: The ML sandbox is required to enable coordinated time synchronization
of operations executed in the ML sandbox as required by the specific use case.
NOTE 4 – The time synchronization may be coordinated by the MLFO by controlling the sequence of
operations executed in the ML sandbox. The sequence of operations triggered by the MLFO may be according
to the synchronisation requirements of the specific use case. An example of a sequence of operations triggered
by the MLFO is the generation of data by a radio access network (RAN)-specific simulator which is input into
the corresponding ML model as an SRC, followed by analysis in the ML model, and finally the application of
an ML inference into specific simulators for the SINK.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-005: The ML sandbox is recommended to consider the quality of data needed
for ML models (training or testing) while generating the simulated data.
NOTE 5 – The quality of data depends on the use case requirements. The requirements on the quality are input
in the ML intent. Examples are alignment and similarity with live networks, including user equipment (UE)
capabilities, the granularity of reported UE measurements, frequency of channel measurements, accuracy of
measured parameters, etc.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-006: The ML sandbox is recommended to support demand mapping
[ITU-T Y.3173] for configuring and updating the simulated ML underlay networks.
NOTE 6 – Demand mapping is achieved by continuous, run-time, matching of the ML intent with the
configuration options provided by the simulated ML underlay network. The configuration of the simulated ML
underlay networks may be continuously adjusted based on demand mapping.
NOTE 7 – Demand mapping may be implemented through the analysis of data patterns, ML pipeline output
and the corresponding optimization of the simulated ML underlay networks.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-007: The ML sandbox is required to provide sanity checks to assess the
correct operation of the simulated ML underlay networks.
7.2 Operational requirements
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-008: The ML sandbox is required to support multiple evaluation ML
pipelines, which may be chained and interfaced with simulators from different levels of the network.
NOTE 1 – Network levels are defined in [ITU-T Y.3172].
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-009: The ML sandbox is required to support the monitoring and evaluation
of ML pipelines and simulation components according to the specifications in the ML intent.
NOTE 2 – Examples of monitoring and evaluation output may include threshold-based asynchronous
notifications from the ML sandbox (to the MLFO), post-processing of the ML output, metering, security threat
analysis, etc. Other outputs may include updated metadata which reflects the results of the evaluations of the
models in the ML sandbox.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-010: The ML sandbox is required to support the testing and evaluation of
multiple ML pipelines at the same time, including aggregated impacts on the network due to the
multiple pipelines.
NOTE 3 – For example, different ML pipelines may use different types of models (e.g., based on the RL and
the SL). The type of model may be decided by the MLFO based on the use case. Simultaneous evaluation of
the different ML pipelines may be triggered for addressing an ML use case. The outputs of these ML pipelines
may be compared to make an optimal decision.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-011: The ML sandbox is required to support training and testing ML models
that combine simulated and real data from the network.
NOTE 4 – The choice of data to be used is managed by the MLFO [ITU-T Y.3172].
NOTE 5 – The combination of simulated and real data may also include augmented data.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-012: The ML sandbox is required to support dynamic resource management
for ML pipeline nodes instantiated in the ML sandbox.
NOTE 6 –The instances of ML pipeline nodes in the ML sandbox (e.g., simulated SRC node) may need
resource management mechanisms like the dynamic resource allocation. The ML sandbox may use various
request handling mechanisms like load balancing towards the ML pipeline nodes (e.g., ML model) in the ML
sandbox.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-013: The ML sandbox is required to enable granular evaluation of the ML
test cases.
NOTE 7 – In the case of batch jobs (combined test cases) which are triggered by the ML sandbox, isolation of
problems found in the evaluation stage require granular information on the specific test case that has failed.
The ML sandbox is needed to enable such granular evaluation.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-014: The ML sandbox is required to support monitoring and evaluating the
network intelligence level.
NOTE 8 – See [ITU-T Y.3173] for monitoring and evaluating the network intelligence level.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-015: The ML sandbox is required to support testing techniques to enhance
the robustness of the ML pipelines.
NOTE 9 – Examples of testing techniques include regression and/or integration of testing techniques for testing
the ML models, data generation techniques for ensuring quality and augmentation of simulated data, simulation
of failure scenarios, or rare scenarios for ML model training.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-016: The ML sandbox is required to produce the output of simulations, tests
and evaluations in a machine-readable format.
NOTE 10 – Metadata corresponding to the model may be updated with the results of the evaluations. Such
updated metadata may be used by the MLFO in future selections of models.
7.3 Communication requirements
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-017: The ML sandbox is required to support data handling (DH) reference
points toward technology-specific simulated ML underlay networks.
NOTE 1 – Data handling reference points are defined in [ITU-T Y.3174].
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-018: The ML sandbox is required to support the transfer of trained models
across the different ML pipelines in the sandbox as well as to other subsystems in the ML overlay.
NOTE 2 – Application and reuse of trained models from the ML sandbox for many use cases are examples of
scenarios where the transfer of trained models across different ML pipelines in the ML sandbox is required.
The transfer and deployment of trained models in live networks to enable specific use cases is an example of
a scenario that requires the transfer of trained models from the ML sandbox to other ML overlays.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-019: The ML sandbox is required to support the transfer of data for training
or testing models across different ML pipelines in the sandbox as well as to other ML overlays.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-020: The ML sandbox is required to support interfaces with the ML
marketplaces to transfer ML models and the corresponding metadata.
NOTE 3 – See clause 8.2.2.2 reference point 13 in [ITU-T Y.3176] for the interface between ML marketplaces
and the ML sandbox. This interface serves both in the downlink (e.g., download models) and the uplink (e.g.,
update models).
NOTE 4 – An example of metadata is the outcome of applying an ML model in a live or test network, which
can be used to enhance trust and confidence in an ML model available in the marketplace.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-021: The ML sandbox is required to support data handling mechanisms
including metadata storage, communication interfaces with data models and ML underlay networks,
and data storage.
NOTE 5 – See [ITU-T Y.3174] for data handling mechanisms.
7.4 Metadata requirements
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-022: The ML sandbox is recommended to reuse the ML metadata store across
different ML underlay networks to allow the interworking between the evaluation ML pipelines and
the simulated ML underlay networks.
NOTE 1 – API-g is stored in the management subsystem to allow the training, testing, and evaluation of ML
models in the simulated ML pipeline [ITU-T Y.3174].
NOTE 2 – Data models (DMs) and the corresponding API-s used in the simulated ML underlay network are
stored in the management subsystem to allow the interworking between the data broker (DBr) and the
simulated NFs [ITU-T Y.3174].
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-023: The ML sandbox is recommended to derive the simulation profile from
the ML intent inputs, from the MLFO along with the simulation environment metadata and use it to
configure and update the simulated ML underlay networks.
NOTE 3 – The simulation profile may include a list of parameters and their values which describe the ML use
case to be trained, evaluated, or tested at the ML sandbox. The MLFO can provide the ML intent inputs offline
or at runtime, based on the triggers.
NOTE 4 – The simulation environment metadata describes the parameters of each simulator. This is provided
by the simulation designer.
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-024: The ML sandbox is recommended to use the ML model metadata from
the ML marketplace to adjust the simulated ML underlay networks and the evaluation scenarios.
NOTE 5 – For instance, the limitations of the algorithms in terms of the amount of data (e.g., unsupervised
learning) should be input as the amount of data to be generated (e.g., the number of access points (AP) to be
simulated, the total simulation time, the minimum number of events, etc.).
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-025: The ML sandbox is required to support the simulation environment
metadata.
NOTE 6 – Simulation environment metadata can be provided to the serving framework for considering the
deployment environment while creating an inference engine (see clause 8.1.3 in [ITU-T Y.3179]).
NOTE 7 – Simulation environment metadata includes the data models used by the simulated NFs and APIs to
access these data.
NOTE 8 – Simulation environment metadata can be used by the data handling to select the type of storage of
data (see clause 7.1.1, REQ-ML-DH-011 in [ITU-T Y.3174]).
REQ-ML-SANDBOX-026: The ML sandbox is recommended to support the isolation between
different instances of the evaluation ML pipelines (instantiated for different ML underlay networks).
NOTE 9 – Examples of reasons for isolation are security, data privacy reasons and support for slicing.
8 High-level architecture
The high-level architecture of the ML sandbox is described here in the context of architecture
frameworks described in [ITU-T Y.3172], [ITU-T Y.3174], and [ITU-T Y.3179]. Interactions
between the components of the ML sandbox subsystem and other components of the architecture
framework are elaborated with a specific focus on modifications to reference points. The components
of the ML sandbox subsystem and their functionalities are described.
8.1 ML sandbox within the high-level ML architecture
To simulate ML underlay networks, the ML sandbox includes the simulated network functions (NFs),
application functions (AFs), and ML pipeline(s) whose elements are managed by the MLFO
[ITU-T Y.3172]. The ML sandbox is particularly useful to address the dynamic networking systems
since it allows validating the effect of the ML-based optimizations before being deployed in the
production environments. Besides, because of the potential limitations of the data coming from live
networks (insufficient amount, privacy issues, etc.), the ML sandbox can be used to generate synthetic
data as a complement to a given training procedure.
Figure 2 provides the high-level architecture showing the main involved components and the ML
sandbox, which are intended to fulfil the requirements specified in clause 7.
NOTE 1 – See clause 8.2 for further details regarding the ML sandbox architectural components shown in
Figure 2.
Figure 2 – ML sandbox within the high-level ML architecture
Figure 2 showcases the ML sandbox subsystem and its main components in the context of the high-
level architectural framework defined in [ITU-T Y.3172]. It extends the high-level architecture for
the ML model serving [ITU-T Y.3179] with specific architecture components of the ML sandbox and
their corresponding interactions.
The reference points shown in Figure 2 are as follows:
Reference points 1 and 2 act as internal reference points within the ML sandbox subsystem, between
the simulated ML underlay networks and the evaluation ML pipeline and are used unmodified, as
defined in [ITU-T Y.3172], for training and update of ML models at the ML sandbox subsystem.
Reference point 3 is the reference point between the ML sandbox and ML pipeline subsystems
[ITU-T Y.3172]. It allows the ML pipelines to interface with the ML sandbox subsystem for training
and update of ML models. It is used only as a model management interface, as described in
[ITU-T Y.3179].
Reference point 4, as defined in [ITU-T Y.3174], is the interface between the ML pipeline subsystem
and the ML underlay network. It is used for the transfer of data between the ML underlay network
and the (evaluation) ML pipeline instantiated in the ML sandbox (see clause 8.2 in [ITU-T Y.3174]).
Data from the ML underlay networks and/or the simulated ML underlay networks may be used to
train the ML models in the ML sandbox subsystem.
Reference point 5, as defined in [ITU-T Y.3172], is the interface between the management subsystem
and the ML pipeline subsystem.
Reference point 6 is used for the management subsystem to manage the models applied to the ML
sandbox [ITU-T Y.3172], including monitoring and evaluating network intelligence levels
[ITU-T Y.3173]. Reference point 6 has two parts:
• Reference point 6.1 [ITU-T Y.3174] is the interface between the management subsystem and
the simulated ML underlay network of the ML sandbox subsystem to orchestrate and manage
the simulated ML underlay networks.
• Reference point 6.2 interfaces the management subsystem with the evaluation ML pipeline
to orchestrate and manage the evaluation ML pipeline.
NOTE 2 – Data from the ML underlay networks and/or the simulated ML underlay networks may be used to
train ML models in the ML sandbox subsystem.
Reference point 7 is the interface between MLFO and other management and orchestration functions
of the management subsystem, used unmodified as defined in [ITU-T Y.3172].
Reference point 11 is the interface between the MLFO and the data handling (DH) components in the
ML overlay, used unmodified as defined in [ITU-T Y.3174].
Reference point 13 is the interface between the ML marketplace and the ML sandbox subsystem,
used unmodified as defined in [ITU-T Y.3176].
Reference point 15 is the interface between the management subsystem and the ML marketplace,
used unmodified as defined in [ITU-T Y.3176].
Reference point 16 is the interface between the ML model serving subsystem and the model
repository, used unmodified as defined in [ITU-T Y.3179].
Reference point 17 is the interface between the ML sandbox subsystem and ML model serving
subsystem, used unmodified as defined in [ITU-T Y.3179].
Reference point 18 is the interface between evaluation ML pipelines and the inference engine, used
from [ITU-T Y.3179].
NOTE 3 – The evaluation ML pipeline referred to here is the same as the ML pipeline in the ML sandbox
subsystem in [ITU-T Y.3179].
Reference point 19 is the interface between the management subsystem and the ML model serving
subsystem, used unmodified as defined in [ITU-T Y.3179].
Reference point 20 is the interface between the simulated ML underlay networks and the simulation
manager used for managing the simulated ML underlay networks. See clause 7.1 for more details.
8.2 Components of the ML sandbox
The ML sandbox contains the components defined in the following subclauses. The detailed
architecture of the ML sandbox subsystem is illustrated in Figure 3.
Figure 3 – Detailed architecture of the ML sandbox subsystem
8.2.1 Simulated ML underlay networks
The simulated ML underlay networks component is reused from [ITU-T Y.3172]. As explained in
[ITU-T Y.3172], the ML sandbox can use data generated from the simulated ML underlay networks
(obtained via reference points 1 and 2), and/or live networks (obtained via reference point 3), for
training or testing of the ML models.
In this Recommendation, two subcomponents of the simulated ML underlay networks are introduced,
simulated NFs and AFs, and model evaluation plug-ins.
NOTE – An example of a simulated NF is a third-party simulation tool such as an ns-3 [b-Riley-ns3].
8.2.1.1 Simulated NFs and AFs
As explained in [ITU-T Y.3174], simulated NFs and AFs provide the ability to support heterogeneous
sources (SRC) of data and SINK functionality. In this Recommendation, these SRC and SINK are
used for training and testing the evaluation ML pipelines.
8.2.1.2 Model evaluation plug-ins
Model evaluation plug-ins are responsible for evaluating the performance of the ML models as per
the requirements defined in the use case. The plug-ins interact with the simulated NFs and AFs using
technology-agnostic interfaces, which would enable the interaction with heterogeneous third-party
applications such as network simulators and the collection of ML model evaluation parameters.
NOTE – Examples of ML model KPIs are model accuracy, recall and precision. Other parameters evaluated
could be inference latency and memory footprint. These parameters are to be specified in the use case
description provided in the ML intent [ITU-T Y.3172].
8.2.2 Simulation manager
The simulation manager manages the simulated ML underlay networks, specifically consisting of the
following subcomponents: simulation designer, simulation composer, monitoring agent, and
simulation post-processor.
Based on inputs from the MLFO, the simulator manager takes into account metadata and policy inputs
from the operator while managing the simulated ML underlay networks. The simulation manager is
responsible for achieving demand mapping [ITU-T Y.3173] while configuring and updating the
simulated ML underlay networks. The simulation manager provides the dynamic resource
management for the ML pipeline nodes instantiated in the ML sandbox.
8.2.2.1 Simulation designer
Based on the input from the MLFO regarding the simulation requirements for the use case, the
simulation designer prepares the set of simulation resources that compose the simulated ML underlay,
corresponding to the ML use case.
NOTE 1 – Inputs from the MLFO may include time-synchronization of the operations executed in the ML
sandbox as required by the specific use case.
NOTE 2 – The information to design the simulated ML underlays can come from the use case (ML intent) or
data gathered by the live ML underlay.
NOTE 3 – As an example, in a traffic steering use case, ML models may be applied to predictively manage
the resource allocation in the network. The simulation designer arrives at the simulation needs for this use case
which may include data generation and simulated resource management mechanisms and corresponding
parameters and configurations. Another example is, as a result of the network dynamics, some path-loss
parameters used by the ML sandbox subsystem may vary over time. To address this issue, the MLFO keeps
track of those changes and provides feedback to the simulation designer to update the necessary simulation
parameters.
8.2.2.2 Simulation composer
The simulation composer uses the design from the simulation designer and identifies the specific
simulation components to use for the use case. It takes as input the configurations and KPIs as
specified in the use case. The simulation composer then deploys, installs, and instantiates the
simulated ML underlay components (e.g., NFs, AFs and model evaluation plug-ins) to be used for
simulating different types of network underlays and evaluating various types of ML models. The
simulation composer may chain and interface simulators from different levels of the network
[ITU-T Y.3172] with multiple ML pipelines.
NOTE – Based on the specified role and requirements of the simulation (derived from use cases), the
simulation composer may indicate the best simulation tool (e.g., a specific implementation of a RAN
simulator). Specific testing techniques like robustness testing may be applied.
8.2.2.3 Monitoring agent
The monitoring agent monitors and evaluates the simulations in the ML sandbox, including the
evaluation ML pipeline and the simulated ML underlay network. The monitoring agent enables the
granular evaluation of ML test cases by the MLFO.
In addition to the use-case-specific parameters obtained from the MLFO, the following five
dimensions are considered [ITU-T Y.3173]: demand mapping, data collection, analysis, decision and
action implementation.
The monitoring of data collection, action implementation, and analysis is done by the monitoring
agent (see clause 8.3 of [ITU-T Y.3173]). This may include monitoring the quality of data needed for
the ML models (training or testing), while generating the simulated data and sanity checks to assess
the correct operation of the simulated ML underlay networks.
8.2.2.4 Simulation post-processor
The simulation post-processor provides an interface whereby data from the simulated ML underlays
are post-processed and presented in a standard-compliant manner to the MLFO, which performs
model evaluations and/or (re)training. This step is critical to handle heterogeneous sources of
information.
NOTE – For instance, once the handler gets the raw logs generated by a simulator (e.g., a CSV file), the post-
processor extracts the relevant information to be used by the MLFO.
8.2.3 Evaluation ML pipeline
The evaluation ML pipeline is used for model evaluation in the ML sandbox environment as described
in [ITU-T Y.3172]. This component supports the transfer of evaluated and tested models and supports
interfaces with the ML marketplaces to transfer the ML models and the corresponding metadata, in
coordination with the MLFO.
NOTE – The evaluation ML pipeline is similar to the ML pipeline defined in [ITU-T Y.3172], except that it
uses simulated ML underlay networks instead of live ML underlay networks. For example, both the evaluation
ML pipeline and live ML pipeline use reference point 4 and reference point 5.
8.2.4 Data handling
Data handling (DH) provides the functionality for the storage of data models and data for simulated
ML underlay networks, used unmodified as defined in [ITU-T Y.3174]. Components of DH as
defined in clause 8.2 of [ITU-T Y.3174] are instantiated in the ML sandbox subsystem. Reference
points 1 and 2 are reused from [ITU-T Y.3172] and [ITU-T Y.3174] between evaluation ML pipelines
and the simulated ML underlay networks. The ML sandbox utilizes DH to dynamically instantiate
new simulated SRCs and/or SINK nodes.
NOTE – DH is shown here for completeness. The role and interactions with DH remain the same as defined
in [ITU-T Y.3174], with the only difference of addressing evaluation ML pipelines with respect to what is
covered in [ITU-T Y.3174].
8.2.5 Inference engine
The inference engine provides ML model inference capability for ML pipeline(s), used unmodified
as defined in [ITU-T Y.3179].
8.3 APIs
Reference points 6.1 and 6.2 are shown in Figure 2 and introduced in clause 8.1. The realization of
the requirements of the ML sandbox necessitates interaction between the ML sandbox and various
other components of the high-level architecture. Reference points 6.1 and 6.2 enable the APIs which
are used for such interactions.
The specific APIs that correspond to each reference point are described below.
NOTE – Interactions between the components using the APIs defined in this clause are depicted in the
sequence diagrams in clause 8.4.
8.3.1 Reference point 6.1
8.3.1.1 Capability discovery request API (Capability_Discovery)
API description: Using reference point 6.1 and complementary external interfaces with simulation
capabilities, the Capability_Discovery API discovers the third-party simulation components that can
be used to perform use-case-specific simulations in the ML sandbox. According to the ML use case,
the MLFO finds and selects the candidate simulation environments from a list of updated capabilities.
Capability_Discovery-Request
Direction: MLFO → ML sandbox subsystem
Table 8-1 describes the information elements of Capability_Discovery-Request.
Table 8-1 – Capability_Discovery-Request information elements
Mandatory/Optional
Information element Type Description
/Conditional
Request identifier Integer Mandatory Identifier of the request, indicating
"capability discovery"
ML profile <Attribute, Mandatory Includes metadata defining policies,
value> requirements, constraints, etc.
array
Capability_Discovery-Response
Direction: ML sandbox subsystem → MLFO
Table 8-2 describes the information elements of Capability_Discovery-Response.
Table 8-2 – Capability_Discovery-Response information elements
Mandatory/Optional
Information element Type Description
/Conditional
List of simulation <Attribute, Mandatory Updated capability list of the available
components value> simulation components
array
Simulation <Attribute, Mandatory Metadata can contain information such as
environment value> installation / execution requirements,
metadata array capabilities of simulated NFs,
performance indicators, configurable
parameters, maturity (alpha / beta), etc.
NOTE 1 – As an example of the third-party NF, ns-3 can be selected to simulate a specific deployment of
IEEE 802.11ax Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs) [b-IEEE 802.11].
NOTE 2 – Based on the use case requirements, the list of potential NFs is narrowed. For instance, NFs can
have associated information (via simulation environment metadata) such as "running time", "billing aspects",
"accuracy", etc.
8.3.1.2 Status reporting API (Monitor_Reporting)
API description: Using reference point 6.1, the status reporting API reports the status of the simulation
components (e.g., health status), so that the MLFO can consider taking healing actions.
Monitor_Reporting (periodical or responsive)
Direction: ML sandbox subsystem → MLFO
Table 8-3 describes the information elements of Monitor_Reporting.
Table 8-3 – Monitor_Reporting information elements
Information element Type Mandatory/Optional Description
/Conditional
Notification identifier Integer Mandatory Identifier of the request, indicating
"monitoring report"
Status Integer Mandatory Code indicating the current status of the
simulation components, e.g., health status
indicated by green, yellow, orange and red
Severity Integer Optional Code indicating the severity of the potential
anomalies identified (Critical, major, minor,
normal or clear)
Monitoring logs String list Optional Raw data resulting from monitoring
Alerts <Attribute, Optional Threshold-based alerts
value> array
Suggested action points String list Optional List of suggested action points to fix the
potential reported issues
NOTE – Monitoring is carried out based on a continuous flow of data generated by the simulation components,
including simulation data (SRC and SINK nodes), regression tests, reporting from simulation modules, etc.
8.3.1.3 Input/Output validation reporting API (Report_IO_Validation)
API description: Using reference point 6.1, the Report_IO_Validation API is used to report the status
of input/output data used/generated at/by the ML sandbox. This information can be used by the
MLFO to generate new data sets, re-train ML models with different configurations, update simulation
components, etc.
Report_IO_Validation
Direction: ML sandbox subsystem → MLFO
Table 8-4 describes the information elements of Report_IO_Validation.
Table 8-4 – Report_IO_Validation-Response information elements
Mandatory/Optional
Information element Type Description
/Conditional
Notification identifier Integer Mandatory Identifier of the request, indicating
"input/output validation result"
Validation type Integer Mandatory Indicates the type of validation performed
(e.g., input data to configure simulation
parameters or output training data validity)
Result of validation Integer Mandatory "Success" or "fail"
Warnings String list Optional Detailed information regarding the
potential issues or misbehaviours observed
from the current input/output data
Error details String list Conditional Detailed information regarding the errors
thrown during the validation procedure
NOTE – The data to be validated includes input data (e.g., to check that demand mapping can be fulfilled at
the simulated ML underlay) and simulation output data (e.g., to assess the feasibility of the trained models, the
accuracy of generated data, etc.). For instance, testing techniques such as equivalence partitioning or centroid
positioning [b-Zhang] can be applied to validate the diversity and the quality of the data generated by the
simulators (e.g., as for validating the synthetic data).
8.3.1.4 Sandbox asynchronous messages API (Sandbox_Async)
API description: Using reference point 6.1, the Sandbox_Async API is used for the sandbox
asynchronous messages defined in clause 8.4.5.
Sandbox_Async
Direction: ML sandbox subsystem → MLFO
Table 8-5 describes the information elements of Sandbox_Async.
Table 8-5 – Sandbox_Async information elements
Mandatory/Optional
Information element Type Description
/Conditional
Message identifier Integer Mandatory Identifier of the message, indicating
"Sandbox asynchronous message"
Message code Integer Mandatory Code of the asynchronous message type
Additional String list Conditional Additional information related to the
information message type
8.3.2 Reference point 6.2
8.3.2.1 MLFO-triggered operations API (MLFO_Trigger)
API description: Using reference point 6.2, the MLFO_Trigger API is used for the MLFO-triggered
operations defined in clause 8.4.4.
MLFO_Trigger-Request
Direction: MLFO → ML sandbox subsystem
Table 8-6 describes the information elements of MLFO_Trigger-Request.
Table 8-6 – MLFO_Trigger-Request information elements
Mandatory/Optional
Information element Type Description
/Conditional
Message identifier Integer Mandatory Identifier of the message, indicating "ML-
triggered operation"
Operation code Integer Mandatory Code of the operation to be performed
Policies and <Attribute, Conditional Metadata including policies and
requirements value> requirements.
array
Simulation <Attribute, Conditional Metadata including simulation,
environment value> configuration, available resources, time
metadata array constraints, etc.
MLFO_Trigger-Response
Direction: ML sandbox subsystem → MLFO
Table 8-7 describes the information elements of MLFO_Trigger-Response.
Table 8-7 – MLFO_Trigger-Response information elements
Mandatory/Optional
Information element Type Description
/Conditional
Message identifier Integer Mandatory Identifier of the message, indicating "ML-
triggered operation"
Response code Integer Mandatory Code of the operation response (OK, bad
request, error, etc.)
Response data (variable) Conditional Depending on the request type, different
response data types can be provided (e.g.,
training data set, trained ML model and
validated ML model)
8.4 Sequence diagrams
This clause provides sequence diagrams that result from the ML sandbox operation. The sequence
diagrams are derived from the requirements in clause 7, the architectural framework defined in
clause 8.1 and the APIs in clause 8.3.
8.4.1 Capability discovery
Simulation components provided by third parties can be used to perform use case-specific simulations
in the ML sandbox. This procedure enables the discovery of such simulation components stored in
third-party repositories. The sequence diagram is shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4 – Capability discovery for third-party simulation components
Prerequisite: MLFO knows the list of third-party repositories, and the offline configured, trusted,
secure channels. Simulation components in the repositories are described using simulation
environment metadata.
Two mechanisms (proactive and reactive) are considered according to the nature of the capability
discovery notification. The steps in Figure 4 are explained below.
Proactive mechanism
This includes the following steps, as shown in Figure 4:
1.1 Third-party simulator repositories update their simulation components to the ML sandbox.
These are to be evaluated in the ML sandbox in combination with the model evaluation plug-
ins. Further component updates can also be provided to the ML sandbox as and when a third-
party simulation repository (e.g., ns-3) releases specific features (e.g., MIMO support).
NOTE 1 – This step is done using an external interface, referred to as Ext-Repository_Update.
1.2 Information from the update message is processed to prepare an updated list of candidate
simulated NFs for evaluation in the ML sandbox.
NOTE 2 – This step is done by the simulation designer (see clause 8.2.2.1).
1.3 The corresponding updated simulation components are published to the trusted MLFOs.
Reactive mechanism
This includes the following steps as shown in Figure 4:
2.1 MLFO queries the ML sandbox for simulation capabilities based on the simulation
environment metadata.
2.2 The ML sandbox sends the query to the trusted third-party simulation component
repositories.
NOTE 3 – This step is done using an external interface, referred to as Ext-Search_Repository.
2.3 Repositories respond with a list of simulation components matching the query.
NOTE 4 – This step is done using an external interface, referred to as Ext-Repository_Update.
2.4 Information from the response message is processed to prepare an updated list of candidate
simulated NFs for evaluation in the ML sandbox.
NOTE 5 – This step is done by the simulation designer (see clause 8.2.2.1).
2.5 The corresponding updated simulation components are published to the trusted MLFOs.
Based on the use case requirements and the result of the capability discovery mechanism, MLFO
arrives at the candidate simulation environments (list of NFs, simulation components, corresponding
configurations, connections and data handling adaptors). From the candidate simulation environments
provided by the MLFO, an operator selects an optimal configuration and deploys it in the ML
sandbox.
In addition, data handling and other underlay changes are also applied based on the selected
configuration.
NOTE 6 – Simulation resources in the repositories are described using the simulation environment metadata.
NOTE 7 – An example of a third-party simulated NF is ns-3, used to simulate a specific deployment of IEEE
802.11ax WLANs.
NOTE 8 – Based on the use case requirements, the list of potential NFs is decided. NFs can have the associated
information (as part of the simulation environment metadata) such as "running time", "billing aspects",
"accuracy", etc.
8.4.2 Health monitoring
Health monitoring is meant to ensure the proper behaviour of the simulation components in the ML
sandbox. The sequence diagram is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5 – Health monitoring
Prerequisite: Simulation components have been set up and the ML intent allows for monitoring
simulation components.
1) ML sandbox sets up the resources for monitoring simulation components.
NOTE 1 – This step is done by the simulation designer (see clause 8.2.2.1).
2) Monitoring is carried out based on a continuous flow of data generated by simulation
components, including simulation data (SRC and SINK nodes), regression tests, reporting
from simulation modules, etc.
NOTE 2 – This step is done by the monitoring agent (see clause 8.2.2.3).
3) Data gathered from monitoring is processed and delivered in the form of reports.
NOTE 3 – This step is done by the simulation post-processor (see clause 8.2.2.4).
4) Periodic reports are generated and sent to the MLFO, according to the ML intent
specification. Alternatively, threshold-based alerts can be activated when undesired events
occur, which are also reported to the MLFO. MLFO may take action after processing the
periodic reports or threshold-based alerts (see clause 8.4.4) and optionally send action points
to the ML sandbox.
5) The ML sandbox applies action points (if any) suggested by the MLFO and/or self-healing
actions.
NOTE 4 – The simulator composer may take action for redefining the simulation environment (e.g.,
switch to a more computation-intensive but accurate tool) if certain indicators of quality are not met.
8.4.3 Validate input/output data
In this scenario, input data and simulated output data are validated. This includes checking the
feasibility of training models, the accuracy of generated data, etc. For instance, testing techniques
such as equivalence partitioning or centroid positioning can be applied to validate the diversity and
the quality of the data generated by simulators.
NOTE 1 – An example of validation of input data is to validate the synthetic data generated by generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [b-Castelli-GANs].
The sequence diagram is shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6 – Validate input/output data
Prerequisite: Simulation components and evaluation ML pipeline have been set up.
For input data:
1.1) ML sandbox receives the input configuration from the MLFO to configure the input data
generation from the simulation environment.
1.2) Input data generation is validated.
NOTE 2 – This step is done by the simulation designer (see clause 8.2.2.1).
1.3) A response with the validation result is provided to the MLFO.
1.4) MLFO may provide updated inputs (if necessary) to configure the simulation environment.
For simulated output data:
2.1) ML sandbox receives the output data from the ML use case (training data set, trained ML
model, evaluation of the ML model).
2.2) Output data is validated.
NOTE 3 – This step is done by the simulation post-processor (see clause 8.2.2.4).
2.3) The result of the validation is sent to the MLFO.
2.4) MLFO may provide updated inputs (if necessary) to configure the simulation environment.
8.4.4 MLFO-triggered operations
The MLFO-triggered operations are generally defined in Figure 7.
Figure 7 – MLFO-trigger operations
The MLFO_Trigger API requests and provides a response to the following set of operations:
Setup environment for the ML use case (SANDBOX-TRIGGER-001)
Prerequisite: Capability discovery is done (see clause 8.4.1).
1) The MLFO sends a request to the ML sandbox to set up the environment for the ML use case
in the sandbox. This request contains the selected candidate simulation environment, as a
result of the procedure in clause 8.4.1.
2) ML sandbox prepares the environment via the simulation designer (see clause 8.2.2.1):
a) This step can optionally include the download and install of the simulation components.
b) Data handling for the simulated ML underlay includes the integration with the data
brokers and data storage units [ITU-T Y.3174]. A plugin to interact with third party
applications can also be employed for the setup.
3) A response is provided by the ML sandbox to the MLFO.
NOTE 1 – Environment setup may use the policies from the MLFO and demand mapping (e.g., ML
intent may require isolation of resources). The ML underlay may also be configured based on the use
case specification and based on the features extracted from the live ML underlay to be simulated.
NOTE 2 – Setting up the evaluation ML pipeline may include the download of ML models from the
marketplaces [ITU-T Y.3176] and the ML model serving [ITU-T Y.3179] to create evaluation ML
pipelines.
NOTE 3 – Environment setup may include the installation of third-party applications or setting up
interfaces, establishing connections via sockets, etc.
Validate environment for ML use case (SANDBOX-TRIGGER-002)
Prerequisite: Setup environment for the ML use case is done (see clause 8.2.2).
1) MLFO requests to run sanity tests on a specific simulation environment for the ML use case.
2) The simulation designer selects and executes the test suite (interaction with third-party
applications can be done through the evaluation plugin).
3) The output of the test suite is processed and the output to the MLFO.
NOTE 4 – For instance, installing a third-party simulation tool may output a set of traces (or logs)
indicating the result of installing the submodules. This information should be post-processed to assess
that the final installation procedure is successfully accomplished regarding the use case requirement.
For example: if the installation of the LTE module fails, but the use case is meant for Wi-Fi (where
the module was successfully installed), then the result of the installation is satisfactory.
4) The MLFO decides whether the validation results are acceptable or not (may include some
basic tests and KPIs).
Manage simulated ML underlay (SANDBOX-TRIGGER-003)
1) The MLFO sends a trigger for modifying / updating the simulated ML underlay. Information
on changes is included in the updated ML profile.
2) The simulation driver configures the simulated ML underlay accordingly (e.g., adapt
configuration parameters, specify desired output, etc.). Besides, there is an information
exchange between the live and the simulated ML underlays (mimic purposes).
3) The ML sandbox responds to the trigger with the information related to the changes done in
the simulated ML underlay (OK/NOK, changelog, etc.).
NOTE 5 – For example, as a result of network dynamics, some path-loss parameters used by the ML sandbox
subsystem may vary over time. To address this issue, the MLFO keeps track of those changes and provides
feedback to the simulation designer to update the necessary simulation parameters.
Evaluate output of ML model (SANDBOX-TRIGGER-004)
Prerequisite: The environment has been set up in the ML sandbox for the ML use case.
1) The MLFO sends a request to the simulation composer in the ML sandbox to run the
simulated ML underlay.
2) The simulation composer uses the "evaluator plugin" to input the output of the ML model.
The plugin can also be used to interact with the third-party application (i.e., translate
commands from the MLFO to the simulator-oriented instructions).
3) Evaluate the output of an ML model: the evaluation platform provides a report which is
processed by the post-processor.
4) The processed report is sent back to the MLFO. The report can also include synthetic data
for training.
NOTE 6 – The information extracted from the simulated ML underlay needs to be post-processed according
to the desired output specified in the use case and the characteristics of the simulated ML underlay. The
evaluation result can be an OK/NOK message, a percentage of reliability, a set of KPIs gathered from the
evaluation procedure, etc.
NOTE 7 – Post-processing for third-party simulation tools may include the conversion of raw data into
meaningful information (e.g., average or deviation on the KPIs).
ML model training (SANDBOX-TRIGGER-005)
Prerequisite: The ML model is served, and the evaluation blocks are ready.
1) The MLFO sends a trigger for training an ML model in the sandbox.
2) Model training is performed at the simulated ML underlay through the simulator composer.
3) The trained ML model is post-processed (e.g., compressed, pruned) according to the use case
and the policies and capabilities (time constraints, link capacity for exchanging information,
storage capabilities, etc.).
4) The trained model is included in the response sent to the MLFO.
Table 8-8 describes the operation codes used in the MLFO-triggered operations.
Table 8-8 – Definition of the MLFO-triggered operation codes (MLFO trigger types)
MLFO Time sync /
Parameters Description
trigger type dependencies
SANDBOX- Request type, ML Time sync = yes Request to prepare the simulation
TRIGGER- profile (evaluation blocks) environment (both simulated ML underlay
001 and evaluation ML pipeline) to train, test,
and evaluate the ML models in the ML
sandbox.
SANDBOX- Request type, Time sync = yes Request to validate (sanity check) the
TRIGGER- validation type, (sanity checklist, test deployed simulation environment. Used
002 acceptance criteria suite, etc.) by the MLFO to determine whether to take
action to fix potential deployment issues,
proceed with the ML model evaluation in
the sandbox, etc.
SANDBOX- Request type, Time sync = yes Request to modify / update the simulated
TRIGGER- update type, (updated simulation ML underlay according to the updates in
003 updated ML profile components) the policies, changes in the live ML
underlay, potential failures of previous
simulated functions, etc.
SANDBOX- Request type, ML Time sync = yes Request to evaluate the impact of the
TRIGGER- profile, ML model (evaluation results) output of an ML model in the simulated
004 output ML underlay, so that some insights can be
provided before applying the output to the
live ML underlay.
SANDBOX- Request type, ML Time sync = no Request to train an ML model in the ML
TRIGGER- profile sandbox.
005
8.4.5 Sandbox asynchronous messages
ML sandbox asynchronous messages are generally defined in Figure 8.
Figure 8 – ML sandbox asynchronous messages
Prerequisite: Asynchronous messages are generated upon certain conditions that are met, which are
specific to the different types of events.
1) Upon meeting the trigger conditions, the ML sandbox sends an asynchronous message to the
MLFO.
2) The message is processed and potential action points are defined.
3) The MLFO sends a response to the ML sandbox.
The sandbox asynchronous message codes are defined in Table 8-9.
Table 8-9 – Definition of the ML sandbox asynchronous message codes
Code Parameters Conditions Description
SANDBOX- Status code / Error code / Threshold-based alert is Report the health status of the
ASYNC-001 detailed report fired / misbehaviour is simulation components
(conditional) detected / keep-alive
message
SANDBOX- Update type / changelog / Update on the simulation Report an update on security,
ASYNC-002 additional information on components is notified accounting and licensing
implications of the update /discovered to/by the ML requirements of simulation
sandbox components
SANDBOX- Alert type / forecasted Threshold-based alert Proactive behavior trend
ASYNC-003 results / additional based on trend analysis identification of simulation
information on the (e.g., service at risk) components and sandbox
potential failure points resources
SANDBOX- Report type / Updated Change in simulation Report an update on the
ASYNC-004 simulation component component is noticed simulation component metadata
metadata
SANDBOX- Report type / Updated Change in the intelligence Report the simulation
ASYNC-005 level of intelligence of level of a simulation environment intelligence level
simulation components component
9 Security considerations
This Recommendation describes an architectural framework for the ML sandbox in the context of
integrating machine learning in future networks including IMT-2020: therefore, general network
security requirements and mechanisms in IP-based networks should be applied [ITU-T Y.2701]
[ITU-T Y.3101].
It is required to prevent unauthorized access to, and data leaking from, the ML sandbox, whether or
not there is a malicious intention with the implementation of appropriate mechanisms, such as those
for authentication and authorization and external attack protection.
Bibliography
[b-IEEE 802.11] IEEE 802.11 WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS (2021), The
Working Group for WLAN Standards.
<https://grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/11/>
[b-IETF RFC 4180] IETF RFC 4180 (2005), Common Format and MIME Type for Comma-
Separated Values (CSV) Files.
<https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4180>
[b-IETF RFC 8259] IETF RFC 8259 (2017), The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data
Interchange Format.
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8259>
[b-Castelli-GANs] Castelli, M., Manzoni, L., Espindola, T., Popovič, A., & De Lorenzo, A.
(2021). Generative adversarial networks for generating synthetic features
for Wi-Fi signal quality. PloS ONE 16(11): e0260308.
<https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0260308>
[b-Riley-ns3] Riley, G. F., & Henderson, T. R. (2010). The ns-3 Network Simulator.
Modeling and Tools for Network Simulation pp. 15-34. Springer.
<https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-12331-3_2>
[b-XML] W3C Recommendation (2008), Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0
(Fifth Edition).
<https://www.w3.org/TR/xml/>
[b-Zhang] Zhang, J. M., Harman, M., Ma, L., & Liu, Y. (2019). Machine Learning
Testing: Survey, Landscapes and Horizons.
<https://arxiv.org/pdf/1906.10742.pdf>
SERIES OF ITU-T RECOMMENDATIONS
Series A Organization of the work of ITU-T
Series D Tariff and accounting principles and international telecommunication/ICT economic and
policy issues
Series E Overall network operation, telephone service, service operation and human factors
Series F Non-telephone telecommunication services
Series G Transmission systems and media, digital systems and networks
Series H Audiovisual and multimedia systems
Series I Integrated services digital network
Series J Cable networks and transmission of television, sound programme and other multimedia
signals
Series K Protection against interference
Series L Environment and ICTs, climate change, e-waste, energy efficiency; construction, installation
and protection of cables and other elements of outside plant
Series M Telecommunication management, including TMN and network maintenance
Series N Maintenance: international sound programme and television transmission circuits
Series O Specifications of measuring equipment
Series P Telephone transmission quality, telephone installations, local line networks
Series Q Switching and signalling, and associated measurements and tests
Series R Telegraph transmission
Series S Telegraph services terminal equipment
Series T Terminals for telematic services
Series U Telegraph switching
Series V Data communication over the telephone network
Series X Data networks, open system communications and security
Series Y Global information infrastructure, Internet protocol aspects, next-generation networks,
Internet of Things and smart cities
Series Z Languages and general software aspects for telecommunication systems
Printed in Switzerland
Geneva, 2022
