I n t e r n a t i o n a l T e l e c o m m u n i c a t i o n U n i o n
ITU-T Y.3090
TELECOMMUNICATION (02/2022)
STANDARDIZATION SECTOR
OF ITU
SERIES Y: GLOBAL INFORMATION
INFRASTRUCTURE, INTERNET PROTOCOL ASPECTS,
NEXT-GENERATION NETWORKS, INTERNET OF
THINGS AND SMART CITIES
Future networks
Digital twin network – Requirements and
architecture
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3090
ITU-T Y-SERIES RECOMMENDATIONS
GLOBAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE, INTERNET PROTOCOL ASPECTS, NEXT-GENERATION
NETWORKS, INTERNET OF THINGS AND SMART CITIES
GLOBAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE
General Y.100–Y.199
Services, applications and middleware Y.200–Y.299
Network aspects Y.300–Y.399
Interfaces and protocols Y.400–Y.499
Numbering, addressing and naming Y.500–Y.599
Operation, administration and maintenance Y.600–Y.699
Security Y.700–Y.799
Performances Y.800–Y.899
INTERNET PROTOCOL ASPECTS
General Y.1000–Y.1099
Services and applications Y.1100–Y.1199
Architecture, access, network capabilities and resource management Y.1200–Y.1299
Transport Y.1300–Y.1399
Interworking Y.1400–Y.1499
Quality of service and network performance Y.1500–Y.1599
Signalling Y.1600–Y.1699
Operation, administration and maintenance Y.1700–Y.1799
Charging Y.1800–Y.1899
IPTV over NGN Y.1900–Y.1999
NEXT GENERATION NETWORKS
Frameworks and functional architecture models Y.2000–Y.2099
Quality of Service and performance Y.2100–Y.2199
Service aspects: Service capabilities and service architecture Y.2200–Y.2249
Service aspects: Interoperability of services and networks in NGN Y.2250–Y.2299
Enhancements to NGN Y.2300–Y.2399
Network management Y.2400–Y.2499
Computing power networks Y.2500–Y.2599
Packet-based Networks Y.2600–Y.2699
Security Y.2700–Y.2799
Generalized mobility Y.2800–Y.2899
Carrier grade open environment Y.2900–Y.2999
FUTURE NETWORKS Y.3000–Y.3499
CLOUD COMPUTING Y.3500–Y.3599
BIG DATA Y.3600–Y.3799
QUANTUM KEY DISTRIBUTION NETWORKS Y.3800–Y.3999
INTERNET OF THINGS AND SMART CITIES AND COMMUNITIES
General Y.4000–Y.4049
Definitions and terminologies Y.4050–Y.4099
Requirements and use cases Y.4100–Y.4249
Infrastructure, connectivity and networks Y.4250–Y.4399
Frameworks, architectures and protocols Y.4400–Y.4549
Services, applications, computation and data processing Y.4550–Y.4699
Management, control and performance Y.4700–Y.4799
Identification and security Y.4800–Y.4899
Evaluation and assessment Y.4900–Y.4999
For further details, please refer to the list of ITU-T Recommendations.
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3090
Digital twin network – Requirements and architecture
Summary
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3090 describes the requirements and architecture of a digital twin
network (DTN). A digital twin network is a virtual representation of a physical network. It is useful
for analysing, diagnosing, emulating, and controlling the physical network based on data, model, and
interface to achieve a real-time interactive mapping between a physical network and a digital twin
network.
History
Edition Recommendation Approval Study Group Unique ID*
1.0 ITU-T Y.3090 2022-02-13 13 11.1002/1000/14852
Keywords
Digital twin, digital twin network, requirements and architecture.
* To access the Recommendation, type the URL http://handle.itu.int/ in the address field of your web
browser, followed by the Recommendation's unique ID. For example, http://handle.itu.int/11.1002/1000/11
830-en.
Rec. ITU-T Y.3090 (02/2022) i
FOREWORD
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is the United Nations specialized agency in the field of
telecommunications, information and communication technologies (ICTs). The ITU Telecommunication
Standardization Sector (ITU-T) is a permanent organ of ITU. ITU-T is responsible for studying technical,
operating and tariff questions and issuing Recommendations on them with a view to standardizing
telecommunications on a worldwide basis.
The World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (WTSA), which meets every four years,
establishes the topics for study by the ITU-T study groups which, in turn, produce Recommendations on
these topics.
The approval of ITU-T Recommendations is covered by the procedure laid down in WTSA Resolution 1.
In some areas of information technology which fall within ITU-T's purview, the necessary standards are
prepared on a collaborative basis with ISO and IEC.
NOTE
In this Recommendation, the expression "Administration" is used for conciseness to indicate both a
telecommunication administration and a recognized operating agency.
Compliance with this Recommendation is voluntary. However, the Recommendation may contain certain
mandatory provisions (to ensure, e.g., interoperability or applicability) and compliance with the
Recommendation is achieved when all of these mandatory provisions are met. The words "shall" or some
other obligatory language such as "must" and the negative equivalents are used to express requirements. The
use of such words does not suggest that compliance with the Recommendation is required of any party.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
ITU draws attention to the possibility that the practice or implementation of this Recommendation may
involve the use of a claimed Intellectual Property Right. ITU takes no position concerning the evidence,
validity or applicability of claimed Intellectual Property Rights, whether asserted by ITU members or others
outside of the Recommendation development process.
As of the date of approval of this Recommendation, ITU had not received notice of intellectual property,
protected by patents/software copyrights, which may be required to implement this Recommendation.
However, implementers are cautioned that this may not represent the latest information and are therefore
strongly urged to consult the appropriate ITU-T databases available via the ITU-T website at
http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/ipr/.
© ITU 2022
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, by any means whatsoever, without the
prior written permission of ITU.
ii Rec. ITU-T Y.3090 (02/2022)
Table of Contents
Page
Rec. ITU-T Y.3090 (02/2022) iii
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3090
Digital twin network – Requirements and architecture
1 Scope
A digital twin network (DTN) is a virtual representation of a physical network. It is useful for
analysing, diagnosing, emulating, and controlling the physical network based on data, model, and
interface, to achieve a real-time interactive mapping between physical networks and digital twin
networks. This Recommendation describes the requirements and architecture of DTN.
The scope of this Recommendation includes the following items:
– Functional requirements of DTN;
– Service requirements of DTN;
– Architecture of DTN;
– Security considerations of DTN.
2 References
The following ITU-T Recommendations and other references contain provisions which, through
reference in this text, constitute provisions of this Recommendation. At the time of publication, the
editions indicated were valid. All Recommendations and other references are subject to revision;
users of this Recommendation are therefore encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the
most recent edition of the Recommendations and other references listed below. A list of the
currently valid ITU-T Recommendations is regularly published. The reference to a document within
this Recommendation does not give it, as a stand-alone document, the status of a Recommendation.
None.
3 Definitions
3.1 Terms defined elsewhere
This Recommendation uses the following terms defined elsewhere:
3.1.1 IMT-2020 [b-ITU-T Y.3100]: Systems, system components, and related technologies that
provide far more enhanced capabilities than those described in [b-ITU-R M.1645].
NOTE – [b-ITU-R M.1645] defines the framework and overall objectives of the future development of
IMT-2000 and systems beyond IMT-2000 for the radio access network.
3.1.2 management [b-ITU-T Y.3100]: In the context of IMT-2020, the processes aiming at
fulfilment, assurance, and billing of services, network functions, and resources in both physical and
virtual infrastructure including compute, storage, and network resources.
3.2 Terms defined in this Recommendation
This Recommendation defines the following terms:
3.2.1 digital twin network: A virtual representation of a physical network. It is useful for
analysing, diagnosing, emulating and controlling the physical network based on data, model and
interface, to achieve the real-time interactive mapping between the physical network and virtual
twin network.
3.2.2 domain: A collection of physical or functional entities which are owned and operated by a
player and can include entities from more than one role. The extent of a domain is defined by a
useful context and one player can have more than one domain.
NOTE – Based on the definition given in [b-ITU-T Y.110].
4 Abbreviations and acronyms
This Recommendation uses the following abbreviations and acronyms:
AI Artificial Intelligence
CPU Central Processing Unit
DTN Digital Twin Network
IBN Intent-based Networking
INT In-band Network Telemetry
IP Internet Protocol
MAC Media Access Control
ML Machine Learning
NetConf Network Configuration
NoSQL Not Only SQL
O&M Operation and Maintenance
SNMP Simple Network Management Protocol
SQL Structured Query Language
5 Conventions
In this Recommendation:
The keywords "is required to" indicate a requirement that must be strictly followed and from which
no deviation is permitted, if conformance to this document is to be claimed.
The keywords "is recommended" indicate a requirement that is recommended but which is not
absolutely required. Thus, this requirement need not be present to claim conformance.
The keywords "is not recommended" indicate a requirement that is not recommended but which is
not specifically prohibited. Thus, conformance with this specification can still be claimed even if
this requirement is present.
6 Overview of a digital twin network
A digital twin is a real-time representation of physical assets in a digital world. It has been used in
many industries towards smart manufacturing and 'Industry 4.0', such as aerospace engineering,
electric grid, car manufacturing, petroleum industry, etc. [b-Tao]. In the future, digital twin
technology will be used extensively in the fields of smart city, human activity management and
scientific research, making the whole society move towards the 'digital twin' world. The network
provides a solid foundation for building the 'digital twin' world. Meanwhile, in the face of
increasing business types, scale and complexity, the network itself also needs to use digital twin
technology to seek solutions beyond the physical network.
A digital twin network (DTN) is a virtual representation of the physical network. DTN is useful for
analysing, diagnosing, emulating and controlling the physical network based on data, model and
interface, to achieve a real-time interactive mapping between physical networks and virtual twin
networks. According to the definition, DTN contains four key characteristics: data, mapping,
model, and interface as shown in below Figure 6-1.
1) Data is the cornerstone for constructing a DTN system. Massive network data collected
from a physical network can be stored in a virtual twin network as a unified data repository,
which can be the single source of truth and provide timely and accurate data support for
models.
2) Real-time interactive mapping between a physical network and a virtual twin network is the
most typical feature where the DTN is different from a network simulation system.
3) Model is the ability source of digital twin network. Various data models built in virtual twin
networks can be designed and flexibly combined to serve network applications.
4) Standardized interface is the key enabler which can effectively ensure the compatibility and
scalability of the DTN system. Southbound interfaces connect physical networks and
virtual twin networks while northbound interfaces exchange information between virtual
twin networks and network applications.
Figure 6-1 – Key characteristics of a digital twin network
Based on the four key characteristics, DTN creates an accurate digital network simulation platform,
which can digitally show the running status and health state of network infrastructures including
physical network devices, logical network devices, ports, links, etc. DTN can help users clearly
perceive the network state, efficiently mine valuable network information, and explore innovative
network applications with friendly immersive interactive interfaces. Through artificial intelligence
(AI) / machine learning (ML), big data, and cloud technology, DTN can also help the physical
network realize low-cost trial, intelligent decision-making, efficient innovation and predictive
maintenance.
7 Requirements of digital twin networks
7.1 Functional requirements
7.1.1 Efficient data collection
It is required for digital twin networks to support massive network data collection from network
infrastructures. The detailed requirements for data collection are listed below.
7.1.1.1 Complete data
– It is required for DTN to support the use of efficient data collection tools and methods to
collect complete network data from physical networks, including but not limited to the
following types:
 Provisional and operational status of physical or virtual devices as well as the network
topology with all the network elements;
 Running status of physical or logical ports and links;
 Logs and event records of all the network elements;
 Statistics (packet loss, traffic throughput, latency, etc.) of flows and ports;
 Various data regarding users and services;
 All above data in time series;
 Life-cycle operation data of all network elements.
– It is required for DTN to get complete data wherein all the required data for the various
network applications can be achieved from the unified data repository of DTN, without
having to temporarily go to the equipment in the network infrastructure layer.
– It is required for DTN to support collecting only the required data, which depends on the
specific network topology and application requirements, without spending the high cost of
resources such as the central processing unit (CPU), memory, bandwidth, etc.) to collect all
the network data.
7.1.1.2 Diverse tools
– It is required for DTN to support the collection of different types of data with different
characteristics.
 Some data (e.g., port statistics, key link info, etc.) requires higher collecting frequency;
 Some data (e.g., flow status, link fault, etc.) needs to be of a higher level of real-time;
 Some data (e.g., device status, port statistics, etc.) can be collected directly and simply
via normal tools;
 Some data (e.g., per-flow latency, traffic matrix, etc.) can only be acquired through
complex network measurement.
– It is required for DTN to support the collection of data using multiple tools or methods
according to different data types.
– It is required for DTN to support the usage of wide-used tools to collect data, such as the
simple network management protocol (SNMP), network configuration (NetConf),
telemetry, in-band network telemetry (INT), etc.
NOTE – SNMP and NetConf can help collect device status and link fault easily; Telemetry can help
network devices proactively report packet loss and link status to digital twin entity and INT can be
used to collect precise per-flow latency and packet forward path.
– It is recommended for DTN to study the new data collection technology in the following
aspects in combination with the data requirements of network application for digital twin
network:
 High-performance data collection technology based on a programmable chip;
 Measurement methods for complex network data such as network performance and
network traffic;
 Collaborative data collection technology for multiple data sources;
 Distributed and collaborative data collection technology for complex networks and the
time synchronization problem of data acquisition;
– It is recommended for DTN to support a unified data collection tool, which is designed to
execute all kinds of data collection tasks at low cost on demand.
7.1.1.3 Lightweight tools
Data collection tools and methods are required to be as lightweight as possible to reduce the
occupation of network equipment resources and ensure that data collection does not affect the
normal operation of the network. The detailed requirements are listed below.
– It is required for DTN to support data collection tools and methods which can improve the
efficiency of execution, reduce the cost of computing, storage and communication
bandwidth.
– It is required for DTN to support minimizing the collection of redundant data, in the case of
maintaining massive and complete data.
– It is required for DTN to support making full use of the data compression technology when
collecting necessary data sets, to reduce resource cost in the collection phase.
7.1.2 Efficient and unified data repository
It is required for digital twin networks to construct a unified data repository, which stores and
manages the massive network data. The requirements on the unified repository are listed below.
– It is required for DTN's unified data repository to have the capability to extract, transfer,
and load the massive network data collected from the physical network; then to store the
data in the database.
– It is required for DTN's unified data repository to have the capability to store various types
of network data, including provisional data, operational data, and data from data-plane and
user-plane.
– It is recommended to build DTN's unified data repository using a heterogeneous database
such as massive parallel processing, Hadoop, not only structured query language (NoSQL),
etc. to store the multi-structure network data which include structured data, no-structured
data and half-structured data.
– It is required for DTN's unified data repository to have the capability to store the network
data efficiently with low hardware and software costs. From this point of view, necessary
data compression is required.
– It is required for DTN's unified data repository to have the capability to support real-time
data access and data acquisition.
– It is required for DTN's unified data repository to provide efficient data services for unified
data models. The data services should include fast search engine, data federation, batch-
data service, data combination, historical data snapshot and rollback, etc.
– It is required for DTN's unified data repository to have the capability to handle high-
concurrency and avoid concurrency conflict.
– It is required for DTN's unified data repository to provide a unified interface to exchange
network data with unified data models.
– It is required for DTN's unified data repository to have the capability to efficiently manage
the massive network data and guarantee the accuracy, consistency, integrity and security of
the data.
– It is required for DTN's unified data repository to support database backup and recovery in
order to achieve high availability.
7.1.3 Unified data models for network applications
It is required for digital twin networks to define and create unified data models for various types of
network applications. The detailed requirements on unified data models are listed below.
– It is required for DTN's unified data models to have the capability of modelling various
network elements, including base stations, switches, routers, firewalls, gateways, etc.
– It is required for DTN's unified data models to have the capability of modelling various
network topologies.
– It is required for DTN's unified data models to have the capability to achieve an accurate
and real-time description of a physical network.
– It is required for DTN's unified data models to have the capability to make full use of the
network data in a unified data repository to set up various data models for network analysis,
emulation, diagnosis, prediction and guarantee for specific application scenarios.
– It is required for DTN's unified data models to have the capability to create various
functional models including network optimization model, traffic scheduling model, load
balancing model, fault prediction model, etc.
– It is required for DTN's unified data models to have the capability to build data models
either based on a single network domain (such as mobile access network, transmission
network, core network, bearer network, etc.) or based on multiple network domains.
– It is required for DTN's unified data models to have the interface to interact with the unified
data repository.
– It is required for DTN's unified data models to have the interface to get network application
requirements and to report simulation results to a network application.
– It is required for DTN's unified data models to have the interface to deliver the change
requests to the physical network elements.
– It is required for DTN's unified data models to have the capability to provide services by a
combination of multiple models.
– It is required for DTN's unified data models to have the capability to provide services to
network applications through a single instance or combinations of multiple instances.
– It is required for DTN's unified data models to have the capability of emulating and
iteratively optimizing network applications.
7.1.4 Open and standard southbound and northbound interfaces
Southbound interfaces of DTN are responsible for information exchange between the physical
network and a network digital twin. Northbound interfaces of DTN are responsible for information
exchange between network digital twins and network applications. A digital twin network is
required to support open and standard southbound and northbound interfaces, to help avoid either
hardware or software vendor lock and achieve interoperability. The detailed requirements on
interfaces are listed below.
7.1.4.1 Requirements of southbound interfaces
– It is required for DTN's southbound interfaces to have the capability to collect various
network data, including provisional data, operational data, and data from the control-plane
and user-plane.
– It is required for DTN's southbound interfaces to have the capability of various collecting
methods, including passive collection, active collection, subscription collection, on-demand
collection, etc.
– It is required for DTN's southbound interfaces to have the capability to support high speed
information exchange. It is also recommended that DTN's support several speed options
(e.g., minute-level, 10-second level, second level (near real-time), and real-time level) to
accommodate different data requirements from applications.
– It is required for DTN's southbound interfaces to support the capability to configure
management, including data collection protocol, frequency or period, etc.
– It is required for DTN's southbound interfaces to have the capability of delivering control
signalling and configuration changes to network elements in the physical network.
7.1.4.2 Requirements of northbound interfaces
– It is required for DTN's northbound interfaces to have the capability to deliver requirements
of a network application to data models in a network digital twin. The application
requirements can be regular network management, innovation network protocol validation,
network optimization, etc. It is recommended that DTN's northbound interface can use an
intent-based interface to deliver the requirements as intents from various applications.
– It is recommended for DTN's northbound interfaces to have the capability to provide a
digital copy of network digital twin, or common data models to third-party applications.
– It is required for DTN's northbound interfaces to have the capability to report execution
results from data models in the network digital twin.
– It is recommended for DTN's northbound interfaces to use restful interface which is light
weighted and extensible to reduce the complexity of application services.
7.1.4.3 Common requirements for both southbound and northbound interfaces
– It is required for DTN's southbound and northbound interfaces to adhere to open and
standardized interface protocols so that the DTN system can connect multiple physical
network elements and serve various network applications.
– It is required for DTN's southbound and northbound interfaces to have high extensibility so
that more features can be added with limited parameter changes and with backward
compatibility.
– It is required for DTN's southbound and northbound interfaces to be easy to access and use.
– It is required for DTN's southbound and northbound interfaces to have the capability to
handle high-concurrency and massive data.
– It is required for DTN's southbound and northbound interfaces to provide a secure and a
reliable information exchange mechanism.
7.1.5 Management of digital twin networks
The management of digital twin networks includes the whole life cycle management process of
data, storage, modelling and instantiation of virtual platforms and entities. The detailed
requirements are listed below.
– It is required for DTN's management to have the capability of data management, topology
management, model management and security management.
– It is required for DTN's management to provide services for the creation, storage, updating
of various data model instances as well as the management of model composition and
application associations.
– It is required for DTN's management to accurately record all transactions related data,
model instances, topologies, and security.
– It is required for DTN's management to have the capability of automatically managing data,
model instances, topologies and security.
– It is recommended for DTN's management to be designed as an independent sub-module in
the network digital twin layer.
7.2 Service requirements
7.2.1 Compatibility
It is required for digital twin networks to have enough compatibility to ensure that DTN is
applicable for network equipment from various vendors, various network types and various network
applications. The detailed requirements on compatibility are listed below.
– It is required for DTN to support various types of networks which contain both physical and
virtual devices and to have the compatibility to support various physical networks,
including the radio access network, transport network, core network, data centre, campus
network, etc. This can ensure that the DTN system is applicable for single domain
networks, cross-domain networks, as well as end-to-end networks.
– It is required for DTN's data repository to have the compatibility to store various types of
network data with heterogeneous databases.
– It is required for DTN's interfaces to have the compatibility to support data collections and
configuration management for network equipment or network elements from different
vendors, whether it is a hardware interface or a software interface.
– It is required for DTN's data models to have the compatibility to map various network
elements and topologies and to serve various network applications having limited parameter
changes.
– It is required for DTN to have backward compatibility so that all updated or new
functionalities (interfaces, data repository, data models, management, etc.) can work
smoothly with the functionalities in the old versions.
– It is recommended that DTN has the capability to co-work with the current network
management system implemented by a network operator, especially when the DTN is used
for complicated network operation and maintenance (O&M).
– It is required for DTN to be compatible with different manufacturers, different types and
different standards of network element and communication equipment access.
7.2.2 Scalability
It is required for digital twin networks to support large scale networks, and support the networks'
growth or shrink in scale. The detailed requirements on scalability are listed below.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to build a virtual twin network corresponding
to a physical network on a large scale. Note that large scale increases the complexity of
software design, data modelling and including other functionality. These should be
specially considered when designing and building a DTN system.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to automatically adjust the scale of virtual twin
networks according to the growth or shrink of physical networks.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to maintain stable performance (e.g., the speed
of data storage, data access, data modelling; the latency of data collection and configuration
updates, etc.) when the physical network is scaled up.
– It is required that all DTN's functionalities (including data collection, data repository, data
modelling, interfaces and management) can smoothly extend their capabilities with no
effect (or as little as possible) on existing functions.
– It is required for DTN to support the integration of network resources such as the gradual
withdrawal of resources when the size of the physical network shrinks.
– It is required for DTN's network digital twin modelling to have the capability to support the
scalability among various physical network domains.
7.2.3 Reliability
A digital twin network should be highly stable and reliable to achieve trustworthy virtual-real
interaction. The detailed requirements on reliability are listed below.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to check external input data and control
instructions to prevent abnormal data and operation.
– It is required for DTN to have strong robustness to deal with various abnormal situations. In
case of manual operation error, illegal data, hardware equipment failure or other situations,
the system should be able to correctly handle or avoid any given error.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to ensure reliable data collection, data storage
and information exchange in the whole lifecycle of end-to-end network service. All data
should be complete, consistent, accurate and secure.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to ensure the reliability of interaction between
a network digital twin and a physical network.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to ensure reliable data modelling. The data
models should be able to accurately describe the status of the physical network, to precisely
predict the network performance trends and potential network faults, and to precisely make
optimization decisions based on AI/ML algorithms.
– It is recommended for DTN to have high availability. The system can operate for 7x24
hours and the total outage time of the whole year cannot exceed 52 minutes, thus having a
reliability level of 99.99%.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability of backup on essential data and functionalities.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to restore previous checkpoints or important
historical points.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability of disaster recovery. When there is a major
disaster, the DTN system can save the business according to the recovery plan, restore the
key business system and ensure that the business is not be interrupted.
7.2.4 Security
A digital twin network is required to be secure enough to avoid all possible attacks. All kinds of
defence plans after the network is attacked maliciously also need to be fully considered. This
Recommendation describes below the security considerations and requirements according to the
different types of threats in DTN.
– It is required for DTN to guarantee data security. The confidentiality, integrity, and
reliability of the sensitive data in the DTN network are required to be maintained
throughout its life cycle including creation, storage, usage, sharing, archiving, destruction,
etc. – It is required for DTN to guarantee network application layer security. The minimum
access to the network digital twin and reliability of instructions are required in the network
application layer.
– It is required for DTN to guarantee network digital twin layer security. Unified data models
and data repositories should be trusted. Network digital twin layers should have the ability
to detect and defend against all kinds of attacks.
– It is required for DTN to guarantee interactive security including the security of interactive
interface, interactive process and interactive association.
– It is required for DTN to guarantee network infrastructure security which requires the
security of the data collector's software and hardware.
7.2.5 Privacy
It is required for a digital twin network to protect a customers' private data with the highest priority,
complying with the laws of the country based on the locations of the network infrastructure or its
digital twin.
– It is required for DTN to protect the privacy of customers' data within the whole lifecycle of
data, including creation, storage, usage, sharing, archiving, destruction, etc.
– It is required for DTN to protect the privacy of customers' operations and usage.
– It is required for DTN's network digital twin to support the privacy mechanism in physical
networks.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to ensure the privacy of interaction between
network digital twins and physical networks.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to protect the registration information of
network elements and customers.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to protect the equipment information of
network elements, including internet protocol (IP) address, media access control (MAC)
address, resource usage information, etc.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to protect the privacy of operation data
generated by the customers.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to protect the privacy of interaction data
between network digital twins and physical networks.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to handle different levels of sensitive data with
different privacy levels, which mean for different levels of resource consumption.
7.2.6 Flexibility
It is required for a digital twin network to be flexible to provide service on-demand according to
various network applications. The detailed requirements are listed below.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to collect and store data on-demand flexibly.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to flexibly combine data models and serve
network applications more flexibly.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to select a variety of cross domain resources on
demand, to serve different network applications and to meet the needs of network
applications in different network entities and different operation stages.
– It is required for DTN to have the flexibility of information exchange and service
cooperation between two or more digital twins.
7.2.7 Visualization
It is required for a digital twin network to have a user-friendly access management services for all
kinds of elements such as data, model, and service by means of visualization. The detailed
requirements are listed as below.
– It is required for DTN to support the visualization of network equipment, topology,
physical and virtual links, traffic, flows, etc.
– It is required for DTN to support the visualization of the changes of the digital twin
network.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to adjust the display granularity of all network
elements and its topology.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to display the life-cycle of data models,
including the instance creation, update, combination and destruction.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to display the process of network simulation
and optimization based on various data models. This can help the customers to better
understand the network and even mine valuable information hidden in the network.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to display the interaction between a network
digital twin and a physical network.
7.2.8 Synchronization
It is required for a digital twin network to synchronize with the real network. It represents the
synchronization between the state of a digital twin virtual entity and the state of a physical entity.
The detailed requirements are listed below.
– It is required for DTN to have the capability to represent the real state of the physical entity
in real-time within the acceptable time delay range.
– It is required for DTN to support the synchronization of control information execution from
a virtual entity to a physical entity within an acceptable range.
8 Architecture of a digital twin network
Digital twin network is an expansion platform of network simulation, and the unique difference
between a DTN architecture and a traditional network management system is the interactive virtual-
real mapping to build closed-loop network automation. Through real-time data interaction between
the physical network and its twin network, the digital twin network might help the network
designers to achieve more simplification, automatic, resilient, and full life-cycle operation and
maintenance. So far, there is no reference or standard architecture for digital twin networks in a
network domain. In other industrial domains, [b-ISO 23247] is working on a standard of digital
twin smart manufacturing framework, which includes four domains: physical manufacturing, data
collection and device control, digital twin representation, and user domains.
Referring the above digital twin architecture for industrial domains and combining it with the
characteristics of communication networks, the digital twin network can be designed as a "Three-
layer, three-domain, and double closed-loop" architecture, as shown in Figure 8-1. The three-layer
refers to the physical network layer, network digital twin layer and network application layer of the
digital twin network system; the three-domain refers to the data domain, model domain and
management domain of the twin network layer, corresponding to the three subsystems of unified
data repository, unified data models and digital twin entity management respectively; 'double
closed-loop' refers to 'inner closed loop' emulation and optimization based on the unified data
models in the twin network layer, and 'outer closed loop' control, feedback and optimization of
network application are based on the three-layer architecture.
Figure 8-1 – A reference architecture of a digital twin network
1) Bottom layer is the physical network layer. All network elements present in the physical
networks exchange massive network data and control with a network digital twin entity, via
southbound interfaces. The physical network can either be a telecommunication operator
network or a data centre network, campus network, industrial internet of things or other
network types. The physical network can either be with a single network domain (e.g.,
access network, transportation network, core network, IP carrier network, etc.), or with an
end-to-end cross-domain network. In addition, the object physical network can either
contain all infrastructures in the network or just contain specific infrastructure (e.g., radio
spectrum resources, user plane function elements in the core network, etc.).
2) Middle layer is the network digital twin layer which is the core of the DTN system. This
layer includes three key subsystems: unified data repository, unified data models and digital
twin entity management.
a) Unified data repository: By collecting and updating the real-time operational data of
various network entities through the southbound interface, a single source of truth for
the network twin network is formed, which provides accurate and complete information
for various network applications. The following are the main responsibilities of a
unified data repository.
– Data collection: To complete the extraction, transformation, loading, cleaning, and
processing of network data, facilitate large-scale data to achieve efficient
distributed storage.
– Data storage: To store the data efficiently with multiple database techniques,
according to the diversified characteristics of network data, which typically include
three categories: user/service data, operational/status/log data, and network
environment/configuration data.
– Data service: To provide a variety of data services for the unified data model sub-
system, including fast retrieval, concurrent conflict, batch service, unified interface,
etc. – Data management: It includes data asset management, data safety management,
data quality management and metadata management.
As the cornerstone of the DTN for building the twin entity, the more complete and
accurate data in the unified data repository, higher richness and accuracy of the unified
data model subsystem can be achieved.
b) Unified data models: For typical application scenarios, the unified data model's
subsystem completes data-based modelling, provides model instances for various
network applications and maximizes the agility and programmability of the network
services. The model instance needs to complete the full emulation and verification of
the prediction, scheduling, configuration, optimization and other objectives in the
virtual twin network to ensure the effectiveness and reliability of the change controls
before they are distributed to the physical network. The data models include two types:
basic models and functional models.
– Basic model refers to the network element model and network topology model of
the network digital twin entity based on the basic configuration, environment
information, operational state, link topology and other information of the network
element, to complete the real-time accurate description of the physical network. In
addition, basic models can help verify and emulate control changes and
optimization solutions to ensure the effectiveness and reliability of the change
control before it is sent to the entity network.
– Functional model refers to various data models such as network analysis,
emulation, diagnosis, prediction, assurance, etc., which are established by making
full use of the network data in a unified data repository for specific application
scenarios. The functional models can be constructed and expanded by multiple
dimensions: by network type, there can be models serving for single network
domain or multiple network domains; by function type, it can be divided into state
monitoring, traffic analysis, security drill, fault diagnosis, quality assurance and
other models; by generality, it can be divided into a general model and special-
purpose model. Specifically, multiple dimensions can be combined to create a data
model for a more specific application scenario. For example, the traffic balance
optimization model can be created on the core switch of one campus network, and
the model instance can be used to serve the corresponding network applications.
As the ability source of DTN, with more types of data models, more powerful is the
ability of the DTN to provide network application.
c) Digital twin entity management completes the management function of the digital twin
network, records the life-cycle of the entity, visualizes and controls various elements of
the network digital twin, including topology management, model management and
security management.
– Topology management is based on basic data models to generate virtual twin
topology corresponding to the physical network and to visualize the network in
multi-dimension and multi-level.
– Model management serves the creation, storage, and update of various data model
instances, as well as the management of model combination and model-application
association. At the same time, it can visually present the data loading, model
simulation and verification process and the results of the model instances.
– Security management is responsible for authentication, authorization, encryption
and integrity protection related to life-cycle data security, model security and
interactive security of the digital twin network.
3) Top layer is the network application layer. Network applications input the requirements to
the network digital twin layer through the northbound interfaces and deploy services
through modelling instances. After full verification, the twin network layer sends the
control updates to the physical entity network through the southbound interfaces. Network
operation and maintenance and optimization, self-driving network, network innovation
technology and other applications can be deployed rapidly with lower cost and higher
efficiency and have a lesser impact on the running of a network business.
9 Security consideration
The IMT-2020 network is subject to security and privacy measures. Sensitive information should be
protected as a high priority to avoid leaking and unauthorized access. Specific security
considerations in this Recommendation for DTN are addressed in clause 7.
Appendix I
Use cases of a digital twin network
(This appendix does not form an integral part of this Recommendation.)
Digital twin network (DTN) can help enable closed-loop network management across the entire
lifecycle, from digital deployment and simulation to visualized assessment, physical deployment,
and continuous verification. In doing so, customers can achieve network-wide insights, precise
planning, and rapid deployment in multiple areas, including networks, services, users and
applications. Given below are the typical use cases in which DTN can bring benefits to the network.
 Use Case 1: Complicated network operation and maintenance
On an extremely large scale, traditional networks have begun to transform into a virtualized
network and many new features have emerged, such as clouded resources, business on
demand designs, resource orchestration, etc., which make network operation and
maintenance face unprecedented pressure.
DTN can combine data acquisition, big data processing and artificial intelligence modelling
to realize the assessment of current status diagnosis of past problems and prediction of
future trends, and give the results of the analysis, simulate various possibilities, and provide
a more comprehensive decision support. This will help the network achieve predictive
maintenance from the current protective maintenance.
 Use Case 2: Improve the efficiency of network optimization
Since there is no effective platform for simulation, traditional network optimization has to
be tried on real networks directly with a long-term cost and high service impact running on
real networks. This also greatly increases the network operator's OPEX (operating
expense).
With the help of DTN, the candidate solution of network optimization can be fully and
quickly verified with lower costs and lower service impacts.
 Use Case 3: Speed up network innovation
Due to higher trial risk, a real network environment is normally unavailable to network
researchers when they explore innovation techniques. Instead, researchers have to use
offline simulation platforms. This greatly impacts the real effectiveness of the innovation
and greatly slows down the speed of the network innovation. Moreover, risk-averse
network operators are naturally reluctant to try new technologies due to higher failure risk
as well as the higher failure cost.
DTN can generate a virtual twin entity of the real network. This helps researchers explore
network innovation (e.g., new network protocols, network AI/ML applications, etc.)
efficiently, and helps network operators deploy new technologies quickly with lower risks.
 Use Case 4: More comprehensive measurement
As mentioned in the above section (efficient data collection), DTN can get massive data
from a network infrastructure directly via various tools. However, network parameters (e.g.,
flow complete time, end-to-end latency, path available bandwidth, etc.) cannot be
monitored or measured directly from the physical network.
DTN can help customers or network operators indirectly estimate or measure network
parameters by analysing massive data from cross domains in a virtual platform, then get
more comprehensive measurements on the network.
 Use Case 5: Implementing intent-based networking (IBN)
Future networks will possibly be intent-based where users can input their abstract 'intent' to
the network, instead of detailed policies or configurations on the network devices. The key
character of an intent-based networking (IBN) system is where the user's intent can be
assured automatically via continuously adjusting the policies and validating the real-time
situation. To lower the impact on the real network, several rounds of adjustment and
validation should be better to be simulated on the DTN platform. This way, DTN can be an
important enabler towards implementing the IBN system quickly and efficiently.
 Use Case 6: Network security strategy drills
With the DTN platform, network security strategy drills can be more efficient (such as
hacker attacks, DDoS attacks, virus attacks, etc.), and helpful for developing defence
policies in advance to ensure the security and reliability of the physical network.
Bibliography
[b-ITU-T Y.110] Recommendation ITU-T Y.101 (1998), Global Information Infrastructure
principles and framework architecture.
[b-ITU-T Y.3100] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3100 (2017), Terms and definitions for IMT-2020
network.
[b-ITU-R M.1645] Recommendation ITU-R M.1645 (2003), Framework and overall objectives of
the future development of IMT-2000 and systems beyond IMT-2000.
[b-ISO 23247] ISO 23247-2:2021, Automation systems and integration – Digital twin
framework for manufacturing – Part 2: Reference architecture.
<https://www.iso.org/standard/78743.html>
[b-Tao] Tao, F., Zhang, H., Liu, A., et al. (2019), Digital Twin in Industry: State-of-
the-Art. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, Vol. 15, No. 4, April,
pp. 2405-2415.
<https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8477101>
SERIES OF ITU-T RECOMMENDATIONS
Series A Organization of the work of ITU-T
Series D Tariff and accounting principles and international telecommunication/ICT economic and policy
issues
Series E Overall network operation, telephone service, service operation and human factors
Series F Non-telephone telecommunication services
Series G Transmission systems and media, digital systems and networks
Series H Audiovisual and multimedia systems
Series I Integrated services digital network
Series J Cable networks and transmission of television, sound programme and other multimedia signals
Series K Protection against interference
Series L Environment and ICTs, climate change, e-waste, energy efficiency; construction, installation
and protection of cables and other elements of outside plant
Series M Telecommunication management, including TMN and network maintenance
Series N Maintenance: international sound programme and television transmission circuits
Series O Specifications of measuring equipment
Series P Telephone transmission quality, telephone installations, local line networks
Series Q Switching and signalling, and associated measurements and tests
Series R Telegraph transmission
Series S Telegraph services terminal equipment
Series T Terminals for telematic services
Series U Telegraph switching
Series V Data communication over the telephone network
Series X Data networks, open system communications and security
Series Y Global information infrastructure, Internet protocol aspects, next-generation networks,
Internet of Things and smart cities
Series Z Languages and general software aspects for telecommunication systems
Printed in Switzerland
Geneva, 2022
