I n t e r n a t i o n a l T e l e c o m m u n i c a t i o n U n i o n
ITU-T Y.3172
TELECOMMUNICATION (06/2019)
STANDARDIZATION SECTOR
OF ITU
SERIES Y: GLOBAL INFORMATION
INFRASTRUCTURE, INTERNET PROTOCOL ASPECTS,
NEXT-GENERATION NETWORKS, INTERNET OF
THINGS AND SMART CITIES
Future networks
Architectural framework for machine learning in
future networks including IMT-2020
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3172
ITU-T Y-SERIES RECOMMENDATIONS
GLOBAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE, INTERNET PROTOCOL ASPECTS, NEXT-GENERATION
NETWORKS, INTERNET OF THINGS AND SMART CITIES
GLOBAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE
General Y.100–Y.199
Services, applications and middleware Y.200–Y.299
Network aspects Y.300–Y.399
Interfaces and protocols Y.400–Y.499
Numbering, addressing and naming Y.500–Y.599
Operation, administration and maintenance Y.600–Y.699
Security Y.700–Y.799
Performances Y.800–Y.899
INTERNET PROTOCOL ASPECTS
General Y.1000–Y.1099
Services and applications Y.1100–Y.1199
Architecture, access, network capabilities and resource management Y.1200–Y.1299
Transport Y.1300–Y.1399
Interworking Y.1400–Y.1499
Quality of service and network performance Y.1500–Y.1599
Signalling Y.1600–Y.1699
Operation, administration and maintenance Y.1700–Y.1799
Charging Y.1800–Y.1899
IPTV over NGN Y.1900–Y.1999
NEXT GENERATION NETWORKS
Frameworks and functional architecture models Y.2000–Y.2099
Quality of Service and performance Y.2100–Y.2199
Service aspects: Service capabilities and service architecture Y.2200–Y.2249
Service aspects: Interoperability of services and networks in NGN Y.2250–Y.2299
Enhancements to NGN Y.2300–Y.2399
Network management Y.2400–Y.2499
Network control architectures and protocols Y.2500–Y.2599
Packet-based Networks Y.2600–Y.2699
Security Y.2700–Y.2799
Generalized mobility Y.2800–Y.2899
Carrier grade open environment Y.2900–Y.2999
FUTURE NETWORKS Y.3000–Y.3499
CLOUD COMPUTING Y.3500–Y.3999
INTERNET OF THINGS AND SMART CITIES AND COMMUNITIES
General Y.4000–Y.4049
Definitions and terminologies Y.4050–Y.4099
Requirements and use cases Y.4100–Y.4249
Infrastructure, connectivity and networks Y.4250–Y.4399
Frameworks, architectures and protocols Y.4400–Y.4549
Services, applications, computation and data processing Y.4550–Y.4699
Management, control and performance Y.4700–Y.4799
Identification and security Y.4800–Y.4899
Evaluation and assessment Y.4900–Y.4999
For further details, please refer to the list of ITU-T Recommendations.
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3172
Architectural framework for machine learning in future networks
including IMT-2020
Summary
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3172 specifies an architectural framework for machine learning (ML) in
future networks including IMT-2020. A set of architectural requirements and specific architectural
components needed to satisfy these requirements are presented. These components include, but are not
limited to, an ML pipeline as well as ML management and orchestration functionalities. The
integration of such components into future networks including IMT-2020 and guidelines for applying
this architectural framework in a variety of technology-specific underlying networks are also
described.
History
Edition Recommendation Approval Study Group Unique ID*
1.0 ITU-T Y.3172 2019-06-22 13 11.1002/1000/13894
Keywords
Architectural framework, high-level architecture, IMT-2020, intent, machine learning, ML,
orchestrator, overlay, pipeline, requirements, sandbox, training, underlay.
* To access the Recommendation, type the URL http://handle.itu.int/ in the address field of your web
browser, followed by the Recommendation's unique ID. For example, http://handle.itu.int/11.1002/1000/
11830-en.
Rec. ITU-T Y.3172 (06/2019) i
FOREWORD
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is the United Nations specialized agency in the field of
telecommunications, information and communication technologies (ICTs). The ITU Telecommunication
Standardization Sector (ITU-T) is a permanent organ of ITU. ITU-T is responsible for studying technical,
operating and tariff questions and issuing Recommendations on them with a view to standardizing
telecommunications on a worldwide basis.
The World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (WTSA), which meets every four years,
establishes the topics for study by the ITU-T study groups which, in turn, produce Recommendations on
these topics.
The approval of ITU-T Recommendations is covered by the procedure laid down in WTSA Resolution 1.
In some areas of information technology which fall within ITU-T's purview, the necessary standards are
prepared on a collaborative basis with ISO and IEC.
NOTE
In this Recommendation, the expression "Administration" is used for conciseness to indicate both a
telecommunication administration and a recognized operating agency.
Compliance with this Recommendation is voluntary. However, the Recommendation may contain certain
mandatory provisions (to ensure, e.g., interoperability or applicability) and compliance with the
Recommendation is achieved when all of these mandatory provisions are met. The words "shall" or some
other obligatory language such as "must" and the negative equivalents are used to express requirements. The
use of such words does not suggest that compliance with the Recommendation is required of any party.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
ITU draws attention to the possibility that the practice or implementation of this Recommendation may
involve the use of a claimed Intellectual Property Right. ITU takes no position concerning the evidence,
validity or applicability of claimed Intellectual Property Rights, whether asserted by ITU members or others
outside of the Recommendation development process.
As of the date of approval of this Recommendation, ITU had not received notice of intellectual
property, protected by patents, which may be required to implement this Recommendation. However,
implementers are cautioned that this may not represent the latest information and are therefore strongly urged
to consult the TSB patent database at http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/ipr/.
 ITU 2019
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, by any means whatsoever, without the
prior written permission of ITU.
ii Rec. ITU-T Y.3172 (06/2019)
Table of Contents
Page
Appendix I – Realization of the high-level architecture on technology-specific underlay
Appendix II – Mapping of the architectural components and supporting aspects to the
Rec. ITU-T Y.3172 (06/2019) iii
Recommendation ITU-T Y.3172
Architectural framework for machine learning in future networks
including IMT-2020
1 Scope
This Recommendation specifies an architectural framework for machine learning in future networks
including IMT-2020.
A set of architectural requirements is presented, which in turn leads to specific architectural
components needed to satisfy these requirements. This Recommendation also describes an
architectural framework for the integration of such components into future networks including
IMT-2020 and guidelines for applying this architectural framework in a variety of technology-
specific underlying networks.
2 References
The following ITU-T Recommendations and other references contain provisions which, through
reference in this text, constitute provisions of this Recommendation. At the time of publication, the
editions indicated were valid. All Recommendations and other references are subject to revision;
users of this Recommendation are therefore encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the
most recent edition of the Recommendations and other references listed below. A list of the currently
valid ITU-T Recommendations is regularly published. The reference to a document within this
Recommendation does not give it, as a stand-alone document, the status of a Recommendation.
[ITU-T Y.3111] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3111 (2017), IMT-2020 network management and
orchestration framework.
3 Definitions
3.1 Terms defined elsewhere
This Recommendation uses the following term defined elsewhere:
3.1.1 network function [b-ITU-T Y.3100]: In the context of IMT-2020, a processing function in
a network.
NOTE 1 – Network functions include but are not limited to network node functionalities, e.g., session
management, mobility management and transport functions, whose functional behaviour and interfaces are
defined.
NOTE 2 – Network functions can be implemented on a dedicated hardware or as virtualized software functions.
NOTE 3 – Network functions are not regarded as resources, but rather any network functions can be
instantiated using the resources.
3.2 Terms defined in this Recommendation
This Recommendation defines the following terms:
3.2.1 machine learning (ML): Processes that enable computational systems to understand data
and gain knowledge from it without necessarily being explicitly programmed.
NOTE 1 – This definition is adapted from [b-ETSI GR ENI 004].
NOTE 2 – Supervised machine learning and unsupervised machine learning are two examples of machine
learning types.
3.2.2 machine learning function orchestrator (MLFO): A logical node with functionalities that
manage and orchestrate the nodes in a machine learning pipeline.
3.2.3 machine learning model: Model created by applying machine learning techniques to data to
learn from.
NOTE 1 – A machine learning model is used to generate predictions (e.g., regression, classification, clustering)
on new (untrained) data.
NOTE 2 – A machine learning model may be encapsulated in a deployable fashion in the form of a software
(e.g., virtual machine, container) or hardware component (e.g., IoT device).
NOTE 3 – Machine learning techniques include learning algorithms (e.g., learning the function that maps input
data attributes to output data).
3.2.4 machine learning overlay: A loosely coupled deployment model of machine learning
functionalities whose integration and management with network functions are standardised.
NOTE – A machine learning overlay aims to minimise interdependencies between machine learning
functionalities and network functions using standard interfaces, allowing for the parallel evolution of
functionalities of the two.
3.2.5 machine learning pipeline: A set of logical nodes, each with specific functionalities, that
can be combined to form a machine learning application in a telecommunication network.
NOTE – The nodes of a machine learning pipeline are entities that are managed in a standard manner and can
be hosted in a variety of network functions [b-ITU-T Y.3100].
3.2.6 machine learning sandbox: An environment in which machine learning models can be
trained, tested and their effects on the network evaluated.
NOTE – A machine learning sandbox is designed to prevent a machine learning application from affecting the
network, or to restrict the usage of certain machine learning functionalities.
3.2.7 machine learning underlay network: A telecommunication network and its related network
functions which interfaces with corresponding machine learning overlays.
NOTE – An IMT-2020 network is an example of a machine learning underlay network.
4 Abbreviations and acronyms
This Recommendation uses the following abbreviations and acronyms:
AF Application Function
AN Access Network
API Application Programming Interface
AR/VR Augmented Reality/Virtual Reality
C Collector (in ML pipeline)
CN Core Network
D Distributor (in ML pipeline)
EMS Element Management System
FMC Fixed Mobile Convergence
GPU Graphic Processor Unit
IoT Internet of Things
KPI Key Performance Indicator
M Model (in ML pipeline)
mIoT massive Internet of Things
MEC Multi-access Edge Computing
ML Machine Learning
MLFO Machine Learning Function Orchestrator
MnS Management Service
MPP Mobility Pattern Prediction
NF Network Function
NOP Network Operator
OAM Operations, Administration and Maintenance
P Policy (in ML pipeline)
PP Preprocessor (in ML pipeline)
QoS Quality of Service
RCA Root Cause Analysis
RRC Radio Resource Control
SBA Service-Based Architecture
SMF Session Management Function
SON Self-Optimizing Network
SRC Source
UE User Equipment
UPF User Plane Function
V2X Vehicle-to-everything
VoLTE Voice over Long-Term Evolution
5 Conventions
In this Recommendation, requirements are classified as follows:
The keywords "is required to" indicate a requirement which must be strictly followed and from which
no deviation is permitted if conformance to this Recommendation is to be claimed.
The keywords "is recommended" indicate a requirement which is recommended but which is not
absolutely required. Thus, this requirement need not be present to claim conformance.
The keywords "can optionally" indicate an optional requirement which is permissible, without
implying any sense of being recommended. This term is not intended to imply that the vendor's
implementation must provide the option and the feature can be optionally enabled by the network
operator/service provider. Rather, it means the vendor may optionally provide the feature and still
claim conformance with the specification.
In the body of this Recommendation and its annexes, the words shall, shall not, should, and may
sometimes appear, in which case they are to be interpreted, respectively, as is required to, is prohibited
from, is recommended, and can optionally. The appearance of such phrases or keywords in an
appendix or in material explicitly marked as informative is to be interpreted as having no normative
intent.
ML pipeline – In this Recommendation, when the symbol shown in Figure 1 is used, this denotes a
subset (including proper subset) of nodes in an ML pipeline. When this symbol is used in a figure,
the symbol stands for the subset of an ML pipeline's nodes not explicitly shown in that figure.
Figure 1 – Symbol used to denote a subset of nodes in an ML pipeline
Service egress and ingress points – In this Recommendation, a node and its service egress and
ingress points are denoted by the symbol in Figure 2. The service egress point is shown with a green
rectangle on top of the node, while the service ingress point corresponds to the red rectangle on top
of the node.
Figure 2 – Symbol used to denote a node with its service egress and ingress points
6 Introduction
Machine learning (ML) provides a way to teach computational systems to gain knowledge from data
without necessarily being explicitly programmed, in order to realize complicated tasks such as detection
of characteristics or prediction of behaviours. As ML becomes an important technical trend in the
industry, network operators and other stakeholders are searching for cost-effective ways to
incorporate ML into future networks including IMT-2020.
While the benefits from such an integration have been discussed under many use cases
(e.g., troubleshooting of network problems, network traffic prediction, traffic optimization adjustment,
network security auditing [b-ITU-T Y.3650] [b-ITU-T Y.3170]), there are many challenges to such an
integration. Some of the important challenges are:
A. The heterogeneous nature of ML functionalities and unique characteristics of future
communication technologies impose a varied set of requirements for integration.
B. Roadmaps for evolution of these ML functionalities and communication networks are not
aligned.
C. The cost of integration, in terms of architecture impact, is an important consideration.
D. Disparate management mechanisms for ML functionalities and network functions
[b-ITU-T Y.3100] will disrupt the operations management of communication networks.
An architectural framework for the integration of ML with future networks including IMT-2020 is
provided to address these challenges.
Building on high-level architectural requirements, such a framework at first provides a common
vocabulary and nomenclature for ML functionalities and their relationships with the communication
networks. The framework addresses the reference points for future networks including IMT-2020
which enable loosely coupled integration with ML functionalities. Management mechanisms for ML
are also described in the framework considering the existing management principles which have been
identified in IMT-2020 networks.
The framework enables a standard method of integrating ML functionalities in future networks
including IMT-2020.
7 High-level architectural requirements
This clause provides high-level requirements for the design of the high-level architecture framework
in clause 8.
These high-level architectural requirements are classified as shown below.
• Enablers for correlation of data across levels and heterogeneous technologies: This set of
requirements addresses challenge A mentioned in clause 6 and the requirements which fall
into this set are provided in clause 7.1.
NOTE – Levels may correspond to different parts of the network where the reference points between
these parts are defined in the relevant network architecture specifications. For example,
[b-ITU-T Y.3104] defines the reference point RP-an between the access network (AN) and the core
network (CN), thus, AN and CN may correspond to different levels of an IMT-2020 network.
• Enablers for deployment: This set of requirements addresses challenge B mentioned in
clause 6 and the requirements which fall into this set are provided in clause 7.2.
• Requirements related to interfaces between the architectural components: This set of
requirements addresses challenges B and C mentioned in clause 6 and the requirements which
fall into this set are provided in clause 7.3.
• Requirements related to declarative specifications used for specifying the ML applications:
This set of requirements addresses challenges C and D mentioned in clause 6 and the
requirements which fall into this set are provided in clause 7.4.
• Requirements related to the management of the architectural components: This set of
requirements addresses challenge D mentioned in clause 6 and the requirements which fall
into this set are provided in clause 7.5.
7.1 Enablers for correlation
Table 7-1 provides requirements regarding enablers for the correlation of data across levels and
heterogeneous technologies.
Table 7-1 – High-level requirements – Enablers for correlation
The ML architecture is recommended to support the correlation of data coming
REQ-ML-COR-001
from multiple sources.
In future networks, sources of data may be heterogeneous, integrated with
different network functions (NFs), and may report different formats of data.
Description These varied "perspectives" can provide rich insights upon correlated analysis.
Architectural components to enable the ML functionalities to collect and
correlate data from these varied sources in the network are needed.
NOTE 1 – As an example, the analysis of data from user equipment (UE), AN,
CN and application function (AF) is needed to predict potential issues related to
quality of service (QoS) in end-to-end user flows.
Notes NOTE 2 – Other examples of such sources of data are self-optimizing network
(SON) functionalities that monitor and correlate network alarms and key
performance indicators (KPIs) [b-3GPP TS 28.554], and then take relevant
action to clear alarms or enhance network KPIs, or give network design
recommendations without human intervention.
Table 7-1 – High-level requirements – Enablers for correlation
a) The ML architecture is required to support multiple technologies of future
networks including IMT-2020 to achieve end-to-end user experience.
REQ-ML-COR-002
b) The ML architecture is recommended to be interfaced with non-IMT-2020
external functional entities to achieve end-to-end user experience.
Future networks will have multiple technologies coexisting side by side, e.g.,
licensed and unlicensed wireless technologies, fixed mobile convergence (FMC)
technologies, legacy and future technologies. The emergence of network slicing
[ITU-T Y.3111] is one example in which vertical technologies (networks
customized to provide flexible solutions for different market scenarios) and their
Description integration into future networks are important. The interfacing of ML
architecture with such functional entities will help in achieving KPIs as for
example specified in [b-3GPP TS 28.554].
Thus, it is important for the ML architecture to be capable of integration with
multiple underlying technologies and even the support of application functions.
NOTE 1 – Vehicle-to-everything (V2X) is an example of a vertical application
which may benefit from the support of network slicing.
NOTE 2 – Various communication network (e.g., 3G, 4G, 5G) technologies
could be considered as examples of underlying technologies.
Applications for hosting in-car entertainment, processing data from drones,
entertainment applications using augmented reality/virtual reality (AR/VR) are
Notes examples of application functions.
NOTE 3 – Examples of network functions which are not directly managed by the
network operator (NOP) are sensors, power circuits and different Internet of
things (IoT) modules. In some use cases, the data from such network functions
are utilized to control and monitor both the network functions deployed in the
network as well as such external network functional entities themselves. This
data could also be then used in various types of network parameter optimizations
to achieve gains in coverage, capacity and quality by the NOP.
The ML architecture is required to support distributed instantiation of machine
REQ-ML-COR-003
learning functionalities in multiple levels.
Distributed instantiation helps in using data from different levels, to enrich
locally available data in a level, as needed. Thus, the ML functionalities may be
Description multilevel.
Independent instances of ML functionalities may be created in multiple levels.
NOTE 1 – In some use cases, the source of data may be placed in an AN and
preprocessed data is handled by the CN [b-ITU-T Y.3102] where the ML model
is hosted.
Notes
NOTE 2 – ML functionalities may be used for performing mobile pattern
predictions (MPPs) or network slice [b-ITU-T Y.3100] configurations using
input from the network at multiple levels (from sources in AN or CN).
7.2 Enablers for deployment
Table 7-2 provides requirements regarding enablers for the deployment of ML functionalities.
Table 7-2 – High-level requirements – Enablers for deployment
The ML architecture is recommended to define the points of interaction between
REQ-ML-DEP-001 ML functions and technology-specific underlay network functions,
independently from functionalities of the machine learning application.
The specification of ML applications in future networks will be related to the
existing (or new) network services or network functions. Based on the
specification of the ML applications, placement and characteristics of the ML
functionalities are decided. The source of data and the target of ML output are
Description
points of tight integration with the technology-specific underlay NFs. Apart from
this, ML functionalities may be generic and do not have tight integration with
technology-specific NFs. Well-defined reference points between the ML
functionalities and the technology-specific underlay NFs are required.
NOTE 1 – ML output may be policies or configurations to be applied in the
network and the target of ML output may be functions in the network for
applying ML output. Such application of ML output may be controlled by
network operator policies.
Notes NOTE 2 – In some use cases, source of data and traffic classification (based on
ML output) may be placed in the user plane of the network, e.g., user plane
function (UPF) [b-ITU-T Y.3104]. These may be considered as points of tight
integration between the ML functionalities and the underlying network
(e.g., AN or CN). Other ML functionalities (e.g., the ML model) do not have
such interface dependencies on the underlying networks.
The ML architecture is required to support split or combined deployments of ML
REQ-ML-DEP-002
functionalities across different underlay network functions.
In future networks, management and orchestration functions [ITU-T Y.3111]
will optimize the location and the performance of NFs accordingly.
Description To carry forward such benefits to ML applications, similar optimizations should
also be applied to ML functionalities. Moreover, the constraints applicable to an
ML functionality may be unique.
NOTE 1 – ML training may need a graphic processor unit (GPU) and may need
to be done in an isolated environment so that it does not affect other
functionalities of the network.
Notes
NOTE 2 – As an example, depending on the latency budget, data availability and
other considerations for ML applications, the ML functionalities could have the
source of data and the ML training hosted in the CN or AN.
Table 7-2 – High-level requirements – Enablers for deployment
The ML architecture is required to support the flexible placement of ML
REQ-ML-DEP-003 functionalities (in coordination with the management and orchestration functions
[b-ITU-T Y.3100] [b-ITU-T Y.3110]) in the underlying network functions.
The flexible placement of ML functionalities could be based, among other
factors, on the specifications of ML applications.
The management and orchestration functions utilize both the specifications of
the ML applications and the conditions in the network to implement this
requirement.
Resource allocation for ML functionalities is required to consider various
constraints (e.g., resource constraints of the NFs, latency constraints specific to
the ML application, availability of data that is specific to the ML application,
data transformation capabilities, performance constraints, training capabilities
Description
and model characteristics).
The ML architecture should provide the ability to place the ML functionalities in
a flexible manner in the network that is most optimal for the performance of the
ML applications and based on the constraints defined in the declarative
specifications of the ML applications.
The constraints for online training and prediction for real-time ML applications
which are captured in the specification form inputs to placing the ML
functionalities in the network that can provide optimal performance for the use
case. NOTE 1 – If the ML model includes a neural network, then a placement decision
in a GPU-based system is desirable.
NOTE 2 – Based on the requirements of the ML applications, the ML
functionalities which provide latency sensitive short-term predictions may be
hosted closer to the edge. The placement may also be influenced by
Notes considerations of data availability. This may be done in coordination with the
split of ML functionalities mentioned in REQ-ML-DEP-002.
NOTE 3 – In certain use cases, user plane data classification may be done using
ML models. Since user plane data classification is a latency-sensitive
application, the model may be hosted at the transport network, whereas the
training could be done at the CN.
The ML architecture is required to support plugging in and out new data sources
REQ-ML-DEP-004
or configuration targets to a running ML environment.
Certain advanced applications in future networks, e.g., massive Internet of
Things (mIoT), require handling of unstructured data from a huge number of
Description
data sources that may be plug and play. One such use case is the analysis of
logged data for anomaly detection in networks.
NOTE 1 – The scaling of ML functionalities based on type and volume of
incoming data is an example of handling new data sources.
Notes NOTE 2 – The configuration of ML functionalities in the network needs to
handle the plugging in and out of new data sources or configuration targets based
on metadata of data sources.
7.3 Interface-related
Table 7-3 provides interface-related requirements.
Table 7-3 – High-level requirements – Interface-related
The ML architecture is recommended to support an interface to transfer trained
REQ-ML-INT-001
models among ML functionalities of multiple levels.
The training of models has certain specific needs, e.g., availability of certain
kinds of processors, availability of certain kinds of training data. Once the
training is done, the ML model has to be sent to the technology-specific underlay
Description
network that is hosting the ML model. Model training can be done separately
from the live network. Thus, sending trained models across multiple levels is an
important requirement.
NOTE 1 – UE, access network functions (AN), core network (CN) functions
could be treated as examples of technology-specific underlying network
functions which could host the trained model.
Notes
NOTE 2 – The CN and AN could be treated as examples of multiple levels.
NOTE 3 – Depending on the availability of data, learning may be done at the CN
or AN and the trained model (e.g., classifier) hosted by the transport networks.
The ML architecture is required to support an interface to transfer data for
REQ-ML-INT-002
training or testing models among ML functionalities of multiple levels.
Certain levels in which the data is available may not have the training
Description capabilities. In such cases, there may be a need to send data for training or
testing to levels where the capacity for such operations is available.
NOTE 1 – ANs may be considered as examples of resource-constrained
networks, whereas CNs may be considered as a level where capacity may be
Notes available to scale.
NOTE 2 – Data preprocessing may be done at the transport network and the
preprocessed data is then sent to the model at the CN for training.
a) While defining the interface with underlying networks, the ML architecture is
recommended to utilize existing standard protocols wherever possible, with
required extensions wherever needed.
b) The ML architecture is recommended to support specific interfaces or
application programming interfaces (APIs) for interfacing with technology-
REQ-ML-INT-003
specific network functions, for sourcing data from such NFs or for
configuring such NFs.
c) The ML architecture is recommended to support logical interfaces between
ML functionalities which can be hosted in multiple levels, and the realization
of such logical interfaces be implemented according to deployment scenarios.
Sources of data and target for ML output may need specific interfaces or APIs
with the underlay networks to extract data or apply configurations. Some use
cases may need a tight coupling at integration stage between the source and
target of ML functionalities and the NFs. In certain cases, an extension of such
Description interfaces may be needed to achieve the ML functionalities in the use case.
The ML functionalities may use interfaces provided by an underlying network as
a source of data or target of configurations. In this sense, these network-specific
APIs may act as realizations of an interface to the source and target of ML
functionalities.
Table 7-3 – High-level requirements – Interface-related
NOTE 1 – With respect to item a) above, certain interfaces may be realized by
reusing existing protocols (e.g., radio resource control (RRC) [b-ITU-T Y.3104],
MEC [b-ETSI MEC 003], management service (MnS) [b-3GPP TS 23.501]).
NOTE 2 – With respect to item b) above, for example, a source running in the
Notes UE may use specific APIs to extract data from a voice over long-term evolution
(VoLTE) client [b-GSMA IR.92].
NOTE 3 – With respect to item c) above, for example, in the use case where the
source runs in the AN but needs measurements from the UE, the AN needs to
configure the UE for this measurement using RRC.
The ML architecture is recommended to support data sharing between ML
REQ-ML-INT-004
functionalities using distributed data sharing mechanisms.
Cross-level sharing of data is needed to enable correlated ML decisions in future
Description
networks.
NOTE – Concepts like data lakes are emerging in future clouds and can also be
Notes
exploited in network operators' clouds.
7.4 Declarative specifications
Table 7-4 provides the requirements regarding declarative specifications.
Table 7-4 – High-level requirements – Declarative specification
The ML architecture is required to support a standard method to represent ML
REQ-ML-SPEC-001 applications, which can be translated into ML functionalities in technology-
specific underlay network functions.
Automation using declarative specification and corresponding translation into
configurations is a characteristic of future networks. Extending this technique to
Description
ML, declarative specification of ML applications and corresponding translation
into configurations of ML functionalities need to be supported.
Interpretation of the declarative specification allows configuration of ML
Notes functionalities in the network by translating the specification into the
configuration that can be hosted by network functions.
The ML architecture is required to support ML applications to specify the
sources of data, repositories of ML models, targets for output from ML models,
REQ-ML-SPEC-002 and constraints on network resources.
The ML architecture is required to support the time constraints requirements of
ML applications.
The separation between the technology-agnostic part of the ML application and
technology-specific deployment is captured in the design time of future network
services. Declarative specifications for the ML applications achieve this
Description separation.
Different ML applications have varied time constraints. These constraints form
an important input to the management and orchestration functions while
determining the placement, chaining and monitoring of the ML functionalities.
Table 7-4 – High-level requirements – Declarative specification
NOTE 1 – With respect to item a) above, as an example, a description written in
a metalanguage may capture the requirements of a network operator for an ML
application. The management and orchestration functions may translate it into
the configuration that can be implemented in the network.
NOTE 2 – With respect to item b) above, at the tightest scale, the application of
Notes ML in beamforming, scheduling, link adaptation network functionalities would
have latency criteria of the order of microseconds, whereas transport and core
network functionalities have a few milliseconds of latency criteria. The least
demanding in terms of latency are management level functionalities, e.g.,
anomaly detection and coverage hole detection, that can afford minutes, hours or
days of latency.
The ML architecture is required to support a flexible split of ML functionalities
REQ-ML-SPEC-003
based on the specifications of ML applications.
Specification of an ML application is an important input for deployment of ML
in future networks including IMT-2020. But network capabilities can change
(hardware can be added or removed), NFs may be scheduled or (re)configured
dynamically by the management and orchestration functions. These dynamic
changes may necessitate a change in the split and placement of the ML
functionalities (e.g., a decision may be taken to collocate certain functions of
Description
ML, based on changes in the link capacity, or a decision may be taken to add a
new source of data based on decisions of the management and orchestration
functions). Thus, a combination of (a) inputs from specification, (b) the
requirement of ML functions to be capable of split and combined deployment
and (c) coordination with the underlying management and orchestration function,
is needed.
NOTE – A new source of data may be instantiated based on scale out decisions
Notes
in the network.
The ML architecture is required to support the specifications of ML applications
REQ-ML-SPEC-004 by third parties to specify the sources of data, repositories of ML models, targets
for output from ML models and constraints on network resources.
Third party [b-ITU-T Y.3100] service providers may offer innovative services
on top of future networks. This may include new ML algorithms. Collaboration
between third party providers and network operators may bring new sources of
Description data or aggregation capabilities. The declarative process in the architecture
should extend the capabilities to include third parties, and they should be able to
include these functionalities in the specification so that end users can benefit
from such innovative services offered by third party providers.
NOTE 1 – In some use cases ML models may be provided as third-party
applications.
NOTE 2 – A smartphone application which interfaces with the sensors on the
UE is an example of a third-party source of data.
Notes
NOTE 3 – A third-party voice over IP service provider wants to optimize call
quality over the network by running an ML application that configures network
parameters. Specification of such an ML application is an example of a third-
party specification.
7.5 Management of ML functionalities
Table 7-5 provides the requirements regarding the management of ML functionalities.
Table 7-5 – High-level requirements – Management of ML functionalities
The ML architecture is required to support ML model selection at the set-up time
REQ-ML-MNG-001
of the ML functionalities.
Advances in machine learning suggest that in future networks there would be
ML models with varied characteristics (e.g., using a variety of optimization
techniques and weights) that are appropriate for different problem spaces and
Description data characteristics.
In future networks, new sources of data may get added dynamically. To extend
the ML applications to such new and heterogeneous sources of data, ML model
selection has to be done dynamically, based on the data provided by the sources.
NOTE – Plug and play of new network functions (e.g., new UPF) into a live
Notes
network may be an example for dynamic on-boarding of new sources of data.
The ML architecture is required to support ML model training and model
REQ-ML-MNG-002
updates while preventing impact on the network.
ML model training has several considerations: use of specific hardware for
speed, availability of data, parameter optimizations, avoiding bias, distribution of
Description training, etc.
Moreover, in future networks, service disruptions should be avoided while
model training and updates are performed.
Notes
The ML architecture is required to support capabilities to monitor the network
REQ-ML-MNG-003 operations based on the effect of ML and to update the ML models and/or
policies without impacting the network.
The effect of ML on the network needs to be monitored. Various KPIs are
measured constantly and the impact of machine learning on them as well as on
Description the ML functionalities themselves needs to be monitored and corrected if
needed, continuously. ML functionalities need to be trained for future
recognition and handling such corrected scenarios.
NOTE – Continuous improvement of the automated fault recovery process
workflows is an example of a process where such monitoring and update is done
in the network. The root cause analysis (RCA) from the fault recovery process is
Notes
provided for configuring the management and orchestration functions, and also
the effect produced by ML in the network is evaluated and used to optimize the
ML functionalities themselves.
Table 7-5 – High-level requirements – Management of ML functionalities
The ML architecture is required to support an orchestration functionality to
REQ-ML-MNG-004
manage all the ML functionalities in the network.
The performance of the ML functionalities in the network is monitored and
when the performance falls below a predefined threshold, the ML functionalities
are reconfigured to improve it.
The varied sources of data (e.g., CN, AN) imply that there could be various
Description training techniques including distributed training. Complex models may be
trained using varied data. The performance of such models can be determined
and compared in an isolated environment.
Based on such comparisons, network operators can then select the appropriate
ML functionalities (based on internal policies) for specific ML applications.
NOTE 1 – Evaluation involves evaluation of network performance along with
performance of ML algorithms.
Notes
NOTE 2 – Reselection of an ML model is an example of reconfiguration done to
improve the performance of the ML functionalities.
The ML architecture is required to support flexible chaining of ML
REQ-ML-MNG-005
functionalities including multilevel chaining.
Flexible chaining of ML functionalities is required to be done based on the
hosting and positioning on different NFs and levels. This is to enable the hybrid
or distributed ML functionalities.
Chaining of ML functionalities may be used to build a complex ML
functionality.
Management and orchestration functions provide NOPs with capabilities to
Description rapidly design, develop and deploy network services in the technology-specific
underlay networks. Similarly, ML functionalities in the network need
mechanisms including flexible chaining to keep up with innovation in the
technology-specific underlay networks. As underlying network services evolve
and deploy rapidly, so do the ML functionalities on top of them, using flexible
chaining techniques. This requirement aims to give the ML functionalities, the
ability to adapt to dynamic service creation and orchestration in the underlying
networks.
Notes
8 Framework of the high-level architecture
The framework of the high-level architecture described in this clause supports the requirements
defined in clause 7.
This clause provides a description of the high-level architectural components and the high-level
architecture itself, and provides guidelines for realization of the high-level architecture on different
technology-specific underlay networks.
This approach to design the architecture provides an ability to analyse both ML solutions which are
agnostic to technology-specific underlying networks and issues specific to integration of ML to such
underlay networks. An example of the realization of this architectural framework on technology-
specific underlay networks is provided in Appendix I.
8.1 High-level architectural components
This clause specifies the high-level architectural components which are essential parts of the
architectural framework. Integration of such components to a network architecture by interfacing with
the NFs, along with the placement of the ML functionalities in such a network, forms the architecture
framework.
Figure 3 – High-level architectural components
The high-level architectural components include the following:
1) Machine learning pipeline
As defined in clause 3, a machine learning pipeline is a set of logical nodes, each with specific
functionalities, that can be combined to form a machine learning application in a telecommunication
network.
NOTE 1 – A machine learning pipeline may be deployed on simulated or live ML underlay networks.
The following describes the nodes of an ML pipeline.
• SRC (source): This node is the source of data that can be used as input to the ML pipeline.
NOTE 2 – Potential SRC nodes include user equipment (UE), session management function (SMF)
[b-ITU-T Y.3104] and application function (AF) [b-ITU-T Y.3104].
• C (collector): This node is responsible for collecting data from one or more SRC nodes.
NOTE 3 – A collector node may have the capability to configure SRC nodes. For example, the radio
resource control (RRC) protocol [b-3GPP TS 23.501] can be used to configure user equipment (UE)
acting as an SRC node. The collector node may use vendor specific operations, administration and
maintenance (OAM) protocols to configure an SMF acting as an SRC node. Such configurations may
be used to control the nature of data, its granularity and periodicity while it is generated from the
SRC.
• PP (preprocessor): This node is responsible for cleaning data, aggregating data or performing
any other preprocessing needed for the data to be in a suitable form so that the ML model
can consume it.
• M (model): This is a machine learning model, in a form which is usable in a machine learning
pipeline.
NOTE 4 – Example is an ML algorithm implemented in software as an NF [b-ITU-T Y.3104].
• P (policy): This node enables the application of policies to the output of the model node.
NOTE 5 – This node can be used, for example, to minimize impact when the output of machine
learning is applied to a live ML underlay network. Specific rules can be put in place by a network
operator to safeguard the sanity of the network, e.g., major upgrades may be done only at night time
or when data traffic in the network is low.
• D (distributor): This node is responsible for identifying the SINK(s) and distributing the
output of the M node to the corresponding SINK nodes.
NOTE 6 – It may have the capability to configure SINK nodes. For example, the RRC protocol may
be used to configure a UE acting as a SINK node.
• SINK: This node is the target of the ML output on which it takes action.
NOTE 7 – For example, a UE acting as a SINK node may adjust the periodicity of channel
measurement based on ML output.
NOTE 8 – A "service egress point" of a node is a point where services exposed by the node (producer
role) can be accessed. A "service ingress point" of a node is a point from where services from other
nodes can be consumed (consumer role).
2) Machine learning function orchestrator (MLFO)
As defined in clause 3, an MLFO is a logical node with functionalities that manage and orchestrate
the nodes of ML pipelines based on ML Intent and/or dynamic network conditions.
NOTE 9 – The MLFO selects and reselects the ML model based on, e.g., its performance.
NOTE 10 – The placement of the ML pipeline nodes, based on the corresponding network capabilities and
constraints of the ML application, is the responsibility of the MLFO.
NOTE 11 – The MLFO also provides chaining functionality, i.e., connecting ML nodes together to form an
ML pipeline. For example, chaining can be used to connect an SRC node instantiated in the access network
with C and PP nodes instantiated in the core network. The chain itself is declared in the ML application
specification and its technology-specific implementation in the network is done by the MLFO. The MLFO
determines the chaining considering the constraints (e.g., timing constraints for prediction).
NOTE 12 – Figure 4 includes ML Intent to emphasise its important role as input to the MLFO. ML Intent is a
declarative description which is used to specify an ML application. ML Intent does not specify any
technology-specific network functions to be used in the ML application and provides a basis for mapping ML
applications to diverse technology-specific network functions. ML Intent may use a metalanguage specific for
machine learning to define ML applications.
3) ML sandbox
An ML sandbox is an isolated domain which allows the hosting of separate ML pipelines to train, test
and evaluate them before deploying them in a live network. For training or testing, the ML sandbox
can use data generated from simulated ML underlay networks and/or live networks.
NOTE 13 – An ML sandbox may benefit from ML techniques such as supervised machine learning to train,
test and evaluate ML models.
In addition to the above high-level architectural components, the following supporting architectural
aspects are to be noted:
• Service-based architecture (SBA) [b-ETSI TS 129 500] may be used to interface ML
functionalities with ML underlay networks. Similarly, for the ML pipeline in the sandbox,
SBA may be used to interface the ML functionalities with the simulated ML underlay
networks.
This provides a uniform reference point towards the ML overlay for NFs and the simulated
ML underlay networks alike.
The SBA may also be used between ML pipeline nodes themselves and to manage the ML
functionalities by the MLFO.
• Data handling reference points are defined between the ML pipeline and the simulated or live
ML underlay networks. Using these reference points, any impact to the ML underlay
networks is localised to the source of data and target of configurations (as a result of ML
pipeline execution).
NOTE 14 – Extensions of existing protocols may be used at the data handling reference points to
minimise the architectural impact to the ML underlay networks.
NOTE 15 – Non-SBA protocols need to be used at the data handling reference points in case the
network functions in the ML underlay networks are not SBA-capable.
With reference to Figure 3, arrows 2 and 3 show the paths to the ML pipeline for the data
generated from the simulated ML underlay networks and the ML underlay networks,
respectively. Arrows 1 and 4 show the paths from the ML pipeline for configuration of the
target based on ML output in the simulated ML underlay networks and the ML underlay
networks, respectively.
Appendix II provides the mapping of the architectural components and supporting architectural
aspects to the high-level requirements provided in clause 7.
8.2 High-level architecture
The high-level architecture shown in Figure 4 is derived from the high-level requirements specified
in clause 7 and builds upon the architectural components described in clause 8.1.
Figure 4 – High-level architecture
The reference points shown in Figure 4 are the following:
1, 2: These are the data handling reference points between simulated ML underlay networks and
an ML pipeline in an ML sandbox subsystem.
3: This is the reference point between an ML sandbox subsystem and an ML pipeline
subsystem.
4: This is the reference point between an ML pipeline subsystem and ML underlay networks.
NOTE 1 – This reference point represents the data handling reference points shown as arrows 3 and
4 in Figure 3.
5, 6: These are the reference points between the management subsystem and, the ML pipeline
subsystem and ML sandbox subsystem, respectively.
7: This is the reference point between the MLFO and other management and orchestration
functions of the management subsystem.
8, 9: These are the reference points between ML pipeline nodes located in different levels.
The three subsystems of the high-level architecture as shown in Figure 4 are given below.
• Management subsystem
This subsystem includes the MLFO and other management and orchestration functions, e.g., those
defined in [ITU-T Y.3111].
The management subsystem enables the extension of the management and orchestration mechanisms
used for future networks including IMT-2020 to ML pipeline nodes. This brings uniformity to the
management of ML functionalities and NFs.
The MLFO works in coordination with the other functions of the management subsystem to manage
the ML pipeline nodes.
NOTE 2 – The reference point(s) between the functions of the management subsystem and NFs in the ML
underlay networks complies(y) with the reference points defined in the related specifications, e.g.,
[ITU-T Y.3111]. These reference points are out of scope of this Recommendation and thus are not shown in
Figure 4.
NOTE 3 – The interaction between the MLFO and the other functions of the management subsystem may be
achieved using service-based architecture (SBA).
• ML pipeline subsystem
The ML pipeline is a logical pipeline that can be overlaid on existing network infrastructures. The
services of the MLFO are used for instantiation and set-up. Integration aspects of such ML pipeline
overlay on technology-specific ML underlay networks may require the extension or definition of
specific protocols and APIs.
In addition, the following points are to be noted:
– SBA may be used for interfacing between NFs and ML pipeline nodes as well as between
ML pipeline nodes themselves. As a first example, an SRC node exposes interfaces for
consuming data from the NFs and producing data towards the collector (C) node. As a second
example, a SINK node exposes interfaces for consuming the ML output from the distributor
(D) node and produces such configurations to the NFs which it interfaces with.
NOTE 4 – Due to the heterogeneity of NFs and ML underlay networks, SBA may not be supported
by NFs in the ML underlay networks. In such cases, protocols and APIs specific to those ML underlay
networks are used between the ML pipeline nodes and the NFs.
– The placement and chaining of the ML pipeline nodes are controlled by the MLFO and this
control may be influenced by factors such as:
• inputs from the ML Intent to the MLFO which may impose constraints on the placement
of ML pipeline nodes.
NOTE 5 – The requirement to place an ML model (M) node on a network computing resource which
provides a specific type of acceleration capability is an example of constraints on the placement of an
M node.
• Feedback received by the MLFO from the management and orchestration functions of
the ML underlay networks or from the ML pipeline nodes may provide inputs on the
placement and chaining of ML pipeline nodes.
NOTE 6 – Decoupling of the location of the ML pipeline nodes from their functionalities, except in
the case of performance constraints, is achieved using the placement and chaining mechanisms.
– The deployment of an ML pipeline in future networks including IMT-2020 may span
different levels. In this case, reference points between nodes located in different levels of an
ML pipeline are used to allow ML pipeline multilevel distribution.
NOTE 7 – As shown in Figure 4, an ML pipeline may be distributed over multiple levels, e.g., a
specific deployment may distribute the pipeline across a UE, AN and CN. Based on the specific ML
application, different ways of distributing the ML pipeline nodes are possible.
• ML sandbox subsystem
An ML sandbox subsystem allows ML pipelines to adapt to dynamic network environments such as
those of future networks including IMT-2020 where a variety of conditions may change (e.g., air
interface conditions, UE position, network capabilities and resources). The ML sandbox subsystem
includes ML pipeline(s) and simulated ML underlay networks, and it is managed by the MLFO
according to the specifications in the ML Intent. The ML sandbox subsystem allows network
operators to study the effect of ML outputs before deploying them on live ML underlay networks.
Feedback from the functions of the management subsystem is provided to the ML sandbox subsystem
so that the ML pipelines of the ML sandbox subsystem can adapt to the dynamically changing
network environments.
The following points are to be noted:
– The reference point between the ML pipeline subsystem and ML sandbox subsystem allows
the ML pipelines to interface with the ML sandbox subsystem for the training and updating
of ML models.
– Data from the ML underlay networks and/or the simulated ML underlay networks may be
used to train the ML models in the ML sandbox subsystem.
– The management of the ML pipeline nodes in the ML sandbox subsystem is also controlled
by the MLFO. This allows the MLFO to train and select the ML model(s) for a given ML
application.
8.3 General guidelines for realization of the high-level architecture
General guidelines for realization of the high-level architecture on different technology-specific
underlay networks are as follows:
• Instantiation of the ML pipeline nodes: An ML application is described using ML Intent. The
flow of information in an ML application can be represented by the chaining in an ML
pipeline. The data from various source nodes, e.g., coming from various underlying
networks, need to be gathered (by a collector node) and preprocessed (by a preprocessor
node) before feeding this data to the ML model (model node). The output of the ML model
is then used to apply policies (by a policy node) that will be implemented (by a SINK node).
An ML application can be realized by instantiating nodes of the ML pipeline with specific
roles (e.g., SRC, C, SINK), and associating these nodes to the technology-specific underlying
network functions, based on the corresponding requirements of the ML application and the
capabilities of the underlying network functions.
The instantiation is performed by the MLFO in coordination with the other management and
orchestration functions.
• Interfacing of ML application with underlying network functions: There are two points of
specific interfacing with the underlying network functions for an ML application, the SRC
and the SINK nodes. The SRC nodes may have either an SBA based interface to the
associated NFs which produce data or a technology-specific interface for non-SBA capable
NFs. Similarly, the SINK nodes may have an SBA based interface to the associated NFs
which enforce the ML output policies or a technology-specific interface for non-SBA capable
NFs.
• Management of the ML pipeline: This is done by the MLFO in coordination with the other
management and orchestration functions.
• ML model training and evaluation in the ML sandbox: This is controlled by the MLFO
independently of the ML underlay networks. The reference point between the ML sandbox
subsystem and ML pipeline subsystem is used to transfer trained ML models, data for training
and ML model updates between the ML sandbox subsystem and the ML underlay networks
which interact with the live ML pipeline.
Appendix I gives examples of applying the above guidelines to the realization of the high-level
architecture on technology-specific underlay networks.
9 Security considerations
This Recommendation describes the architectural framework of machine learning which is expected
to be applied in future networks including IMT-2020: therefore, general network security
requirements and mechanisms in IP-based networks should be applied [ITU-T Y.2701]
[ITU-T Y.3101].
It is required to prevent from unauthorized access to, and data leaking from, an ML pipeline, whether
or not they have a malicious intention, with implementation of mechanisms regarding authentication
and authorization, external attack protection, etc.
Appendix I
Realization of the high-level architecture on technology-specific
underlay networks
(This appendix does not form an integral part of this Recommendation.)
Figure I.1 gives an example of realization of the high-level architecture on an IMT-2020 network
[b-ITU-T Y.3104] [ITU-T Y.3111].
Figure I.1 – Example of realization of the high-level architecture in an IMT-2020 network
This example of realization is represented in the following manner: the ML pipeline shows the ML
pipeline node positions wherever the nodes are hosted, e.g., CN, AN, UE or management functions.
For example, the ML pipeline represented by arrows 1→2→4→ML pipeline 2 uses inputs from the
UE to make predictions at the CN (e.g., MPP-based ML applications).
NOTE – The sandbox subsystem is not shown for simplicity in Figure I.1, but its functionality is applicable
also to Figure I.1.
The following describes different realization instances with respect to requirements identified in
clause 7:
• Realization instance in support of the requirements in clauses 7.1 and 7.2:
– Consider arrows 5→4→ML pipeline 2→6: This ML pipeline uses inputs from the CN
and possibly a combination of UE inputs to make predictions at the CN and applies them
to the management functions. This application of ML output can in turn affect
configurations in different levels (e.g., SON decisions made at the CN or closed loop
decisions on resource allocations done in the network).
– Consider arrows 1→3→ML pipeline 1→7: This ML pipeline uses inputs from the UE
and hosts an ML model in AN for latency sensitive decisions to be applied in the AN
itself.
• Realization instance in support of the requirements in clause 7.3:
– Consider arrow 1: This can be realized using RRC.
– Consider arrows 2, 3, 4, 5, 7: This can be realized as an extension of reference points in
the CN [b-ITU-T Y.3104].
– Consider arrow 6: This can be realized via reuse of reference points defined in
[ITU-T Y.3111].
• Realization instance in support of the requirements in clause 7.4:
– The UE is a resource-constrained device, hence only the SRC is instantiated in the UE.
This constraint is specified in the ML Intent.
• Realization instance in support of the requirements in clause 7.5:
– The collectors in the AN and CN are placed by the MLFO based on the specifications of
the ML applications in the ML Intent. For latency sensitive applications in the AN, ML
pipeline 1 is used. ML pipeline 2 is used for latency tolerant applications. The chaining
is done according to the requirements specified in the ML Intent.
Appendix II
Mapping of the architectural components and supporting aspects
to the requirements in clause 8
(This appendix does not form an integral part of this Recommendation.)
Table II.1 provides the mapping of the architectural components and supporting aspects to the
requirements in clause 7.
Table II.1 – Mapping of the architectural components and
supporting aspects to the requirements
Architectural Requirements Mapping explanation
components and
supporting aspects
ML pipeline See clauses 7.1 and 7.2. The ML pipeline provides a common vocabulary
for ML in future networks including IMT-2020.
By defining the ML pipeline nodes, it becomes
possible to consider the evolution of ML
separately from the underlay networks.
Instantiation of these nodes form an important
part of deployment of ML overlay on different
underlay networks. The functions of these nodes
are defined independently of their location in the
network, and hence this allows flexible
placement of such nodes in the network. Split,
merge and chaining of ML pipeline nodes allows
deploying complex functions from these basic
nodes.
MLFO See clauses 7.2, 7.4 and 7.5 The MLFO orchestrates and manages the ML
pipeline nodes. It is also responsible for optimal
placement and chaining of ML pipeline nodes in
the network. It implements these functions in
coordination with the management and
orchestration functions. The declarative
specifications of the ML applications are
supported by the MLFO by converting them into
underlay-specific deployments. It also selects the
models and reselects them based on the needs of
the ML applications and other constraints
defined in the ML Intent.
ML sandbox See clause 7.5 This subsystem provides the ability to train,
evaluate and monitor the performance of ML
models before deploying them in a real network.
It interfaces with the underlay networks for the
transfer of data or trained models. In addition, it
uses the simulated ML underlay networks which
may generate data required for training the ML
models.
Table II.1 – Mapping of the architectural components and
supporting aspects to the requirements
Architectural Requirements Mapping explanation
components and
supporting aspects
ML Intent See clause 7.4 Written in a metalanguage, this architectural
supporting aspect defines the ML application, its
needs in terms of data input, configuration
output, any other constraints or characteristics. It
is used as input towards the functionalities of the
MLFO. This is the input for the MLFO to create
a deployable ML pipeline (one which conforms
to the requirements) on specific underlay
networks. By standardizing this architectural
aspect, it is possible for third party solution
providers to integrate with the ML pipeline.
SBA See clause 7.3 This architectural supporting aspect is used to
interface between the underlay network functions
and the ML pipeline. It provides the necessary
loose coupling between the ML overlay and the
ML underlay networks. SBA is also used to
interface between the simulated ML underlay
networks and the ML pipeline. It is used to train
the ML pipeline and to configure the simulated
ML underlay networks using the ML pipeline.
Bibliography
[b-ITU-T Q.5001] Recommendation ITU-T Q.5001 (2018), Signalling requirements and
architecture of intelligent edge computing.
[b-ITU-T Y.2322] Recommendation ITU-T Y.2322 (2018), The functional architecture of
virtualized control network entities management and orchestrator in next
generation network evolution.
[b-ITU-T Y.2701] Recommendation ITU-T Y.2701 (2007), Security requirements for NGN
release 1.
[b-ITU-T Y.3100] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3100 (2017), Terms and definitions for
IMT-2020 network.
[b-ITU-T Y.3101] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3101 (2018), Requirements of the IMT-2020
network.
[b-ITU-T Y.3102] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3102 (2018), Framework of the IMT-2020
network.
[b-ITU-T Y.3104] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3104 (2018), Architecture of the IMT-2020
network.
[b-ITU-T Y.3105] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3105 (2018), Requirements of capability
exposure in the IMT-2020 network.
[b-ITU-T Y.3110] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3110 (2017), IMT-2020 network management
and orchestration requirements.
[b-ITU-T Y.3170] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3170 (2018), Requirements for machine
learning-based quality of service assurance for the IMT-2020 network.
[b-ITU-T Y.3650] Recommendation ITU-T Y.3650 (2018), Framework of big-data-driven
networking.
[b-ITU GLOSSARY] Broadband: Acronyms, Abbreviations & Industry Terms.
https://www.itu.int/osg/spu/ni/broadband/glossary.html
[b-ETSI GR ENI 004] ETSI GR ENI 004 V1.1.1 (2018), Experiential Networked Intelligence
(ENI); Terminology for Main Concepts in ENI.
[b-ETSI MEC 003] ETSI GS MEC 003 V1.1.1 (2016), Mobile Edge Computing (MEC);
Framework and Reference Architecture.
[b-ETSI NFV-IFA 014] ETSI GS NFV-IFA 014 V2.3.1 (2017), Network Functions Virtualisation
(NFV) Release 2; Management and Orchestration; Network Service
Templates Specification.
[b-ETSI TS 129 500] ETSI TS 129 500 V15.0.0 (2018-07) 5G; 5G System; Technical
Realization of Service Based Architecture; Stage 3 (3GPP TS 29.500
version 15.0.0 Release 15).
[b-GSMA IR.92] GSMA IR.92 (VoLTE) (2018) – IMS Profile for Voice and SMS.
[b-IEC] IEC White Paper on Edge Intelligence.
http://www.iec.ch/whitepaper/ pdf/IEC_WP_Edge_Intelligence.pdf
[b-3GPP TS 23.501] 3GPP TS 23501 (2018), System Architecture for the 5G System
(Release 15).
[b-3GPP TS 28.554] 3GPP TS 28.554 (2018), Management and orchestration of 5G networks;
5G end to end Key Performance Indicators (KPI) (Release 15).
SERIES OF ITU-T RECOMMENDATIONS
Series A Organization of the work of ITU-T
Series D Tariff and accounting principles and international telecommunication/ICT economic and
policy issues
Series E Overall network operation, telephone service, service operation and human factors
Series F Non-telephone telecommunication services
Series G Transmission systems and media, digital systems and networks
Series H Audiovisual and multimedia systems
Series I Integrated services digital network
Series J Cable networks and transmission of television, sound programme and other multimedia
signals
Series K Protection against interference
Series L Environment and ICTs, climate change, e-waste, energy efficiency; construction, installation
and protection of cables and other elements of outside plant
Series M Telecommunication management, including TMN and network maintenance
Series N Maintenance: international sound programme and television transmission circuits
Series O Specifications of measuring equipment
Series P Telephone transmission quality, telephone installations, local line networks
Series Q Switching and signalling, and associated measurements and tests
Series R Telegraph transmission
Series S Telegraph services terminal equipment
Series T Terminals for telematic services
Series U Telegraph switching
Series V Data communication over the telephone network
Series X Data networks, open system communications and security
Series Y Global information infrastructure, Internet protocol aspects, next-generation networks,
Internet of Things and smart cities
Series Z Languages and general software aspects for telecommunication systems
Printed in Switzerland
Geneva, 2019
