ARTICLE 1 (extract)
1.169 harmful interference: Interference which endangers the functioning of a radionavigation service or of other safety services or seriously degrades, obstructs, or repeatedly interrupts a radiocommunication service operating in accordance with Radio Regulations (CS).
Article 15
Interferences
Section I − Interference from Radio Stations
15.1 § 1 All stations are forbidden to carry out unnecessary transmissions, or the transmission of superfluous signals, or the transmission of false or misleading signals, or the transmission of signals without identification (except as provided for in Article 19).
15.2 § 2 Transmitting stations shall radiate only as much power as is necessary to ensure a satisfactory service.
15.3 § 3 In order to avoid interference (see also Article 3 and No. 22.1):
15.4 a) locations of transmitting stations and, where the nature of the service permits, locations of receiving stations shall be selected with particular care;
15.5 b) radiation in and reception from unnecessary directions shall be minimized by taking the maximum practical advantage of the properties of directional antennas whenever the nature of the service permits;
15.6 c) the choice and use of transmitters and receivers shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article 3;
15.7 d) the conditions specified under No. 22.1 shall be fulfilled.
15.8 § 4 Special consideration shall be given to avoiding interference on distress and safety frequencies, those related to distress and safety identified in Article 31 and those related to safety and regularity of flight identified in Appendix 27. (WRC07)
15.9 § 5 The class of emission to be employed by a station should be such as to achieve minimum interference and to assure efficient spectrum utilization. In general this requires that in selecting the class of emission to meet these objectives every effort shall be made to minimize the bandwidth occupied, taking into account the operational and technical considerations of the service to be performed.
15.10 § 6 The out-of-band emissions of transmitting stations should not cause harmful interference to services which operate in adjacent bands in accordance with these Regulations and which use receivers in conformity with Nos. 3.3, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13 and relevant ITUR Recommendations.
15.11 § 7 If, while complying with the provisions of Article 3, a station causes harmful interference through its spurious emissions, special measures shall be taken to eliminate such interference.
Section II − Interference from electrical apparatus and installations of any kind except equipment used for industrial, scientific and medical applications
15.12 § 8 Administrations shall take all practicable and necessary steps to ensure that the operation of electrical apparatus or installations of any kind, including power and telecommunication distribution networks, but excluding equipment used for industrial, scientific and medical applications, does not cause harmful interference to a radiocommunication service and, in particular, to a radionavigation or any other safety service operating in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations1.
Section III − Interference from equipment used for industrial, scientific and  medical applications
15.13 § 9 Administrations shall take all practicable and necessary steps to ensure that radiation from equipment used for industrial, scientific and medical applications is minimal and that, outside the bands designated for use by this equipment, radiation from such equipment is at a level that does not cause harmful interference to a radiocommunication service and, in particular, to a radionavigation or any other safety service operating in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations1.
Section IV − Tests
15.14 § 10 1) Before authorizing tests and experiments in any station, each administration, in order to avoid harmful interference, shall prescribe the taking of all possible precautions such as the choice of frequency and of time and the reduction or, in all cases where this is possible, the suppression of radiation. Any harmful interference resulting from tests and experiments shall be eliminated with the least possible delay.
15.15 2) For the identification of transmissions made during tests, adjustments or experiments, see Article 19.
15.16 3) In the aeronautical radionavigation service, it is undesirable, for safety reasons, to transmit the normal identification during emissions conducted to check or adjust equipment already in service. Unidentified emissions should however be restricted to a minimum.
15.17 4) Signals for testing and adjustment shall be chosen in such a manner that no confusion will arise with a signal, abbreviation, etc., having a special meaning defined by these Regulations or by the International Code of Signals.
15.18 5) For testing stations in the mobile service see No. 57.9.
Section V − Reports of Infringements
15.19 § 11 Infringements of the Constitution, Convention or Radio Regulations shall be reported to their respective administrations by the control organization, stations or inspectors detecting them. For this purpose they shall use forms similar to the specimen given in Appendix 9.
15.20 § 12 Representations relating to any serious infringement committed by a station shall be made to the administration of the country having jurisdiction over the station, by the administrations which detect it.
15.21 § 13 If an administration has information of an infringement of the Constitution, the Convention or the Radio Regulations (in particular Article 45 of the Constitution and No. 15.1 of the Radio Regulations) committed by a station under its jurisdiction, the administration shall ascertain the facts and take the necessary actions. (WRC12)
Section VI − Procedure in a case of harmful interference
15.22 § 14 It is essential that Member States exercise the utmost goodwill and mutual assistance in the application of the provisions of Article 45 of the Constitution and of this Section to the settlement of problems of harmful interference.
15.23 § 15 In the settlement of these problems, due consideration shall be given to all factors involved, including the relevant technical and operating factors, such as: adjustment of frequencies, characteristics of transmitting and receiving antennas, time sharing, change of channels within multichannel transmissions.
15.24 § 16 For the purpose of this Section, the term “administration” may include the centralizing office designated by the administration, in accordance with No. 16.3.
15.25 § 17 Administrations shall cooperate in the detection and elimination of harmful interference, employing where appropriate the facilities described in Article 16 and the procedures detailed in this Section.
15.26 § 18 Where practicable, and subject to agreement by administrations concerned, the case of harmful interference may be dealt with directly by their specially designated monitoring stations or by direct coordination between their operating organizations.
15.27 § 19 Full particulars relating to harmful interference shall, whenever possible, be given in the form indicated in Appendix 10.
15.28 § 20 Recognizing that transmissions on distress and safety frequencies and frequencies used for the safety and regularity of flight (see Article 31 and Appendix 27) require absolute international protection and that the elimination of harmful interference to such transmissions is imperative, administrations undertake to act immediately when their attention is drawn to any such harmful interference. (WRC07)
15.29 § 21 In cases of harmful interference where rapid action is required, communications between administrations shall be transmitted by the quickest means available and, subject to prior authorization by the administrations concerned in such cases, information may be exchanged directly between specially designated stations of the international monitoring system.
15.30 § 22 When a case of such harmful interference is reported by a receiving station, it shall give to the transmitting station whose service is being interfered with all possible information which will assist in determining the source and characteristics of the interference.
15.31 § 23 If a case of harmful interference so justifies, the administration having jurisdiction over the receiving station experiencing the interference shall inform the administration having jurisdiction over the transmitting station whose service is being interfered with, giving all possible information.
15.32 § 24 If further observations and measurements are necessary to determine the source and characteristics of and to establish the responsibility for the harmful interference, the administration having jurisdiction over the transmitting station whose service is being interfered with may seek the cooperation of other administrations, particularly of the administration having jurisdiction over the receiving station experiencing the interference, or of other organizations.
15.33 § 25 When cases of harmful interference occur as a result of emissions from space stations, the administrations having jurisdiction over these interfering stations shall, upon request from the administration having jurisdiction over the station experiencing the interference, furnish current ephemeral data necessary to allow determination of the positions of the space stations when not otherwise known.
15.34 § 26 Having determined the source and characteristics of the harmful interference, the administration having jurisdiction over the transmitting station whose service is being interfered with shall inform the administration having jurisdiction over the interfering station, giving all useful information in order that this administration may take such steps as may be necessary to eliminate the interference.
15.35 § 27 On being informed that a station over which it has jurisdiction is believed to have been the cause of harmful interference, an administration shall, as soon as possible, acknowledge receipt of that information by the quickest means available. Such acknowledgement shall not constitute an acceptance of responsibility. (WRC2000)
15.36 § 28 When a safety service suffers harmful interference the administration having jurisdiction over the receiving station experiencing the interference may also approach directly the administration having jurisdiction over the interfering station. The same procedure may also be followed in other cases with the prior approval of the administration having jurisdiction over the transmitting station whose service is being interfered with.
15.37 § 29 An administration receiving a communication to the effect that one of its stations is causing harmful interference to a safety service shall promptly investigate the matter and take any necessary remedial action and respond in a timely manner. (WRC2000)
15.38 § 30 When the service rendered by an earth station suffers harmful interference, the administration having jurisdiction over the receiving station experiencing such interference may also approach directly the administration having jurisdiction over the interfering station.
15.39 § 31 If the harmful interference persists in spite of the action taken in accordance with the procedures outlined above, the administration having jurisdiction over the transmitting station whose service is being interfered with may address to the administration having jurisdiction over the interfering station a report of irregularity or infraction in accordance with the provisions of Section V.
15.40 § 32 If there is a specialized international organization for a particular service, reports of irregularities and of infractions relating to harmful interference caused or suffered by stations in this service may be addressed to such organization at the same time as to the administration concerned.
15.41 § 33 1) If it is considered necessary, and particularly if the steps taken in accordance with the procedures described above have not produced satisfactory results, the administration concerned shall forward details of the case to the Bureau for its information.
15.42 2) In such a case, the administration concerned may also request the Bureau to act in accordance with the provisions of Section I of Article 13; but it shall then supply the Bureau with the full facts of the case, including all the technical and operational details and copies of the correspondence.
15.43 § 34 1) In the case where an administration has difficulty in identifying a source of harmful interference in the HF bands and urgently wishes to seek the assistance of the Bureau, it shall promptly inform the Bureau.
15.44 2) On receipt of this information, the Bureau shall immediately request the cooperation of appropriate administrations or specially designated stations of the international monitoring system that may be able to help in identifying the source of harmful interference.
15.45 3) The Bureau shall consolidate all reports received in response to requests under No. 15.44 and, using such other information as it has available, shall promptly attempt to identify the source of harmful interference.
15.46 4) The Bureau shall thereafter forward its conclusions and recommendations to the administration reporting the case of harmful interference. These shall also be forwarded to the administration believed to be responsible for the source of harmful interference, together with a request for prompt action.
