July 26, 2024
IT Outage from CrowdStrike’s Update: Impacts to Certain
Public Safety Systems and Considerations for Congress
On July 19, 2024, CrowdStrike, a U.S. cybersecurity firm,
released a software update to their customers. The update
caused certain systems to crash, disrupting services across
several industries, including airlines, banks, hospitals,
government agencies, and public safety systems.
CrowdStrike reported that the incident was caused by “a
defect found in a single content update of its software on
Microsoft Windows operating systems” and was not a
cyberattack. Though the update affected less than 1% of all
Windows machines, the impacts were widespread and
global. The incident illustrates the vulnerabilities of
information technology (IT) systems, increased dependence
and risks in relying on third-party vendors for critical IT
services, and lack of protocols and backup systems in the
event of IT system failures.
•
In Alaska, state troopers announced 911 systems were
not operating correctly due to the incident and posted
alternative phone numbers to call in lieu of 911.
•
In Middletown, OH, police issued a notice to the public
of its inability to receive 911 calls and offered
alternative phone numbers.
Other jurisdictions reported no impacts to 911 services.
Other Public Safety-Related Systems
In some areas (examples below), the faulty CrowdStrike
update affected other public safety-related systems.
•
In Columbus, OH, police reportedly were unable to
access data from terminals in their vehicles, including
law enforcement data systems and license plate
information, and firefighters were unable to receive
dispatch information in their vehicles.
Impact on Public Safety Systems
•
The incident affected public safety agencies that use
CrowdStrike’s cybersecurity software on their computer
systems. This included some 911 systems; police and fire
agency systems; fire alarms; and broadcast networks, some
of which play a role in emergency alerting. It also affected
the computers and operations of some federal agencies that
support public safety agencies and emergency response.
In Ocean City, MD, fire alarms that automatically
contact the fire department upon detection of a fire
reportedly were affected.
Federal Agencies Supporting Public Safety
This In Focus discusses the incident’s impact on certain
U.S. public safety communications systems and services.
Selected 911 Systems and Services
The CrowdStrike update reportedly affected public safety
systems and services in certain jurisdictions across several
states. In some areas (examples below), 911 centers were
able to receive voice calls, but their computer systems were
not operational.
•
•
In Phoenix, AZ, the police department reported the
outage affected their computerized 911 dispatch
center—people could still call the 911 center and calls
were being answered, but caller information was
recorded manually rather than through the
computerized dispatch system.
In Portland, OR, the mayor’s office announced some of
the city’s computers and servers were affected,
including the Bureau of Emergency Communication
computer-aided dispatch (CAD) system—people could
still make voice calls to the 911 center, but the center
had to switch to taking calls manually rather than
answering calls using its computerized system.
In other areas (examples follow), the update reportedly
affected 911 calling.
•
A Department of Homeland Security (DHS) manager
reported that some staff encountered issues logging
into desktop computers but were able to work through
phones, virtual desktop, or web-based applications.
•
DHS’s Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) reported some issues with its systems, but an
agency spokesperson said, “there are no impacts to
FEMA’s critical or immediate lifesaving and lifesustaining operations. There is also no evidence of any
data loss.” FEMA’s Integrated Public Alert and
Warning System (IPAWS) and the Emergency Alert
System were reportedly working normally; however,
some broadcasters whose stations may play a role in
distribution of alerts and warnings were affected.
Impact on Telecommunications Systems
Public safety agencies rely on commercial
telecommunication networks as an additional means of
communications, for prioritization of calls for officials, and
for 911 calling and emergency alerting. Telecommunication
networks seemingly were not affected by the incident.
People were able to make calls and communicate on
landline and cell phone networks. IT systems of some
telecom providers who use CrowdStrike’s service were
affected, leading to some disruption of business operations
and customer service, but networks remained operational.
IT Outage from CrowdStrike’s Update: Impacts to Certain Public Safety Systems and Considerations for Congress
The incident was similar to a February 22, 2024, outage of
the AT&T wireless network in that both were caused by a
faulty software update, and both affected public safety
systems. The events were different in that AT&T was
updating its own network, whereas CrowdStrike—a thirdparty vendor that provides cybersecurity services to
companies and government agencies—was updating its
client-end software on its customers’ computers.
Future Public Safety Considerations
In a 2017 white paper on telecommunications security,
Oracle, a U.S.-based computer networking technology
company, explained that telecommunication networks were
“designed in a different era,” where a small set of operators
managed the physical interconnection of networks and
network security. The emergence of Internet Protocol
(IP)—the set of rules for addressing and routing data over
the internet—enabled interconnectivity between many
networks, creating the global internet and the ability for IPbased networks and devices to interconnect. With the
adoption of IP-based devices (e.g., smartphones, smart
TVs), Oracle reports, “now virtually anyone can purchase
or gain access to networks,” creating new risks.
The telecommunications and public safety sectors have
been migrating to IP-based networks and software-defined
networks to enhance network management and performance
and enable interconnectivity. One example is Next
Generation 911 (NG911), which allows for advanced
capabilities, such as text-to-911 and other multimedia
communications (e.g., videos), improved call routing,
enhanced location-finding, and interconnection with other
911 centers. While NG911 enables interconnectivity
between 911 centers, enhancing redundancy and resiliency,
it also introduces new vulnerabilities, including cyber risks.
Some companies address cyber risks internally, protecting
their devices, networks, and data through their own IT
solutions. Others adopt third-party vendors to protect their
systems. CrowdStrike is a third-party vendor providing
such services. Use of third-party vendors for critical IT
services creates another risk for network operators in that
any outage caused by or to a third-party provider or supplier
also presents risks. In this case, dependence on
CrowdStrike, a large cybersecurity firm that offers its
services globally, explains the widespread outage.
The incident demonstrates the need for cybersecurity
detection and services as well as the heavy reliance that
entities, including public safety agencies, may have on one
vendor. The risk is that when the vendor releases a software
update over the internet, it can affect many computers and
many entities at once, including public safety agencies. As
more public safety systems move toward IP-based systems,
more entities may rely on network-based, third-party
services to address cyber risks. In this context, it may be
important for public safety agencies to increase attention to
and investment in backup protocols and systems that allow
entities to maintain continuity of service during outages.
Executive Branch Response
The White House reportedly has been assessing the impact
of the incident on federal IT, critical infrastructure, and
public safety systems and to industry. DHS’s Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) announced that
it was working closely with CrowdStrike and with federal,
state, local, tribal, and territorial partners, as well as with
critical infrastructure and international partners to assess
impacts and support remediation efforts. The Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) reported it was
working with other federal agencies to assist with the
disruptions and assess the extent of the impact on 911
services.
Congressional Response
Some Members and committees have responded to the
CrowdStrike incident. The chair and a subcommittee chair
of the House Committee on Homeland Security wrote a
letter requesting that CrowdStrike schedule a hearing with
the subcommittee. Some Members of the House Oversight
and Accountability and House Energy and Commerce
Committees reportedly have separately requested briefings
from CrowdStrike.
Considerations for Congress
Congress may seek to assess and address potential new
risks and backup considerations for public safety agencies,
particularly as Congress considers funding for the transition
to NG911. For instance, Congress could direct
•
DHS’s CISA to work with public and private partners
to identify and assess risks to public safety systems and
recommend mitigation methods and best practices to
avoid outages of public safety systems.
•
National Institute of Standards and Technology to
develop recommendations for minimum standards for
testing and release protocols for software updates as it
does for software testing and security.
Congress also could provide or prioritize funding for
critical infrastructure resiliency, including for public safety
backup systems.
While the FCC regulates telecommunications service
providers and requires reporting of outages that may affect
911 services, it has limited regulatory authority over
internet service providers or IT service providers that
support public safety communications (e.g., 911, alerting).
The FCC recently has sought comment on a proposal to
require broadband internet access providers to report on
outages during disasters; the FCC cited public safety
dependencies on the internet. Congress may consider
policies to ensure internet outages, such as
telecommunications outages, are timely reported and
communicated to public safety system operators (e.g., 911
centers, alerting agencies, police and fire departments).
See also CRS Report R48135, IT Disruptions from
CrowdStrike’s Update: Frequently Asked Questions.
Colby Leigh Pechtol, Specialist in Telecommunications
Policy
Jill C. Gallagher, Specialist in Telecommunications Policy
IT Outage from CrowdStrike’s Update: Impacts to Certain Public Safety Systems and Considerations for Congress
Disclaimer
This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress.
Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the
United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.
https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF12717 · VERSION 1 · NEW
